We all have the capacity to kill people
and murder people and do other terrible
things. The question is why we don't do
those things rather than why we do do
those things quite often. Most men have
fantasized about killing someone, about
70% in two studies, and most women as
well. More than 50% of women have
fantasized about killing somebody. So
murder fantasies are incredibly common.
The following is a conversation with
Julia Shaw, a criminal psychologist who
has written extensively on a wide
variety of topics that explore human
nature, including psychopathy, violent
crime, psychology of evil, police
interrogation, false memory
manipulation, deception detection, and
human sexuality.
Her books include Evil, about the
psychology of murder and sadism,
The Memory Illusion, about false
memories, Bi, about bisexuality, and her
new book that you should definitely go
order now called Green Crime, which is a
study of the dark underworld of
poachers, illegal gold miners, corporate
frauds, hitmen, and all kinds of other
environmental criminals.
Julia is a brilliant and kind-hearted
person with whom I got the chance to
have many great conversations with on
and off the mic. This was an honor and a
pleasure.
This is the Lex Fridman podcast. To
support it, please check out our
sponsors in the description, where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, get feedback, and so on.
And now, dear friends, here's Julia
Shaw.
You wrote the book Evil: The Science
Behind Humanity's Dark Side.
So lots of interesting topics to cover
here. Let's start with the continuum.
You describe that evil is a continuum.
In other words, the dark tetrad,
psychopathy, sadism, narcissism,
Machiavellianism, are a continuum of
traits, not a binary zero-one label
monster or non-monster. So can you
explain this continuum?
Yeah, so each trait on the dark tetrad,
as it's called, which is the four traits
that are associated with dark
personality traits, so things that we
often associate with the word evil, like
sadism, which is a pleasure in hurting
other people, Machiavellianism, which is
doing whatever it takes to get ahead,
narcissism, which is taking too much
pleasure in yourself and seeing yourself
as superior to others, and then there's
psychopathy. Psychopathic personality
specifically often lacks in empathy,
and it's usually characterized by a
number of different traits, including a
parasitic lifestyle, so mooching off of
others, deceptiveness, lying to people,
and again that empathy dimension, where
you are more comfortable hurting other
people because you don't feel sad when
other people feel sad. Now all of those
traits, psychopathy, sadism,
Machiavellianism, and narcissism, all of
them have a scale. And so you can be low
on each of those traits or you can be
high on each of those traits. And what
the dark tetrad is, it's actually a way
of classifying people into
those who might be more likely to engage
in risky behaviors or harmful behaviors
and those who are not. And if you score
high on all of them, you're most likely
to harm other people. But each of us
scores somewhere. So I might score score
low on sadism but higher on narcissism.
And in all of them I'm probably
subclinical. And so this is the other
thing we often talk about in psychology
is that there's clinical traits and
clinical diagnoses, like someone is
diagnosed as having narcissism,
or they're subclinical, which is you
don't quite meet the threshold, but you
have traits that are related and that
are so important for us to understand in
the same context.
So early in the book you raised the
question that I think you highlight as a
very important question. If you could go
back in time, would you kill baby
Hitler? This is somehow a defining
question. Can you explain? Well, it's
about whether you think that people are
born evil. And so the question of would
you kill baby Hitler is sort of a meant
to be something that gets people
chatting about whether or not they think
that people are born with the traits
that make them capable of extreme harm
towards others, or whether they think
it's socialized, whether it's something
that maybe in how people are raised is
sort of manifests over time. And with
Hitler, we know from certainly
psychologists who have poured over his
traits over time and looked at who he
was over the course of his life, there's
always this question of sort of was he
mad or bad? And with the answer to was
he mad, well, he certainly had some
characteristics that people would
associate with,
for example, maybe sadism, with
this idea that he was less high on
empathy is probably also showcased in
his work. But in terms of
whether he was born that way, I think
the answer usually would be no. And
actually in his early life he didn't
showcase quite a lot of the traits that
later he sort of defined the horrors
that he was capable of. So would I go
back in time and kill baby Hitler? The
answer is no,
because I don't think it's a straight
line from baby to adult, and I don't
think people are born evil. So you think
a large part of it is nurture versus
nature, the environment shaping the
person to become
to manifest the evil
that they bring out to the world. Well,
and I I would be careful with using the
word evil because I think we shouldn't
use it to describe human beings because
it most commonly others people. It's in
fact, I think, makes us capable of
perpetrating horrendous crimes against
those we label evil. So for me that word
is it's the end of a conversation. It's
when we call somebody evil, we say,
"This person is so different from me
that I don't even need to bother trying
to understand why they are capable of
doing terrible things, because I would
never do such things. I am good." And so
that artificial differentiation between
good and evil is something that
certainly with the book I'm trying to
dismantle. And that's why introducing
continuums for different kinds of
negative traits is really important. And
introducing this idea that the there's
nothing fundamental to people that makes
them capable of great harm. We all have
the capacity to kill people and murder
people and do other terrible things. The
question is why we don't do those things
rather than why we do do those things
quite often. So I think
humanizing and understanding that we all
have these traits is the most important
thing in in my book, certainly.
Yeah, I think a prerequisite of
of doing evil,
I see this in war, a lot, is to
dehumanize the other. In order to be
able to murder them on scale, you have
to reformulate the war as a fight
between good and evil. And the
interesting thing you see with war is
both sides think that it's the battle of
good versus evil. It almost always is
like that, especially at large-scale
wars. That's right. And on top of
dehumanization, there's also this other
thing called deindividuation, which is
where you see yourself as part of the
group and you no longer see yourself as
an individual. And so it's this fight of
us versus them. And so you need both of
those things. You need that
sort of collapse of empathy for other
people, the people who are on the other
side, and you need this idea that you
can be swallowed by the group, and that
gives you a sense of
also the cloak of justice, the cloak of
morality, even when,
you know, maybe you are on the wrong
side. And and that's where, I mean,
getting into sort of who's on the right
side of each war is always a more
complicated issue, but certainly calling
other people evil and calling the other
side evil and dehumanizing them is is
crucial to most of these kinds of
fights. Yeah, you promote empathy as an
important thing to do when we're trying
to understand each other. And then a lot
of people are uncomfortable with empathy
when it comes to uh
folks that we traditionally
label as evil. Hitler is an example. To
have empathy means that you're somehow
dirtying yourself by the evil. What's
your case for empathy, even when uh
we're talking about some of the darker
humans in human history?
My case for empathy, or evil empathy as
I sometimes call it, so empathy for
people who we often call evil. Also, the
title of my book is Evil, or in the UK
market it's Making Evil, which is a
reference to a Nietzsche quote, which is
thinking evil is making evil. The idea
being that evil is a label we place onto
others. There's nothing inherent to
anything that makes it evil. And so I
also think that we need to
well,
dismantle that and empathize with people
we call evil because if we're saying
that this is the worst kind of act or
worst kind of manifestation of what
somebody can be. So if someone can
destroy others, torture others, hurt
others, I work as a criminal
psychologist, so I work a lot on sexual
abuse cases, on rape cases, on murder
trials. And so in those contexts, that
word evil is used all the time to go,
"This person is evil." And if we're
doing that, then we need to go, "Okay,
but what we actually want is we don't
really just want to label people. We
want to stop that behavior from
happening." And the only way we're going
to do that is if we understand what led
that person to come to that situation
and to engage in that behavior. And so
that's why evil empathy I think is
crucial, because ultimately what we want
is to make society safer, and the only
way we can do that is to understand the
psychological and social levers that led
them to engage in this behavior in the
first place.
So on a small tangent,
I get to interview a bunch of folks that
number of people consider evil. So how
would you give advice about how to
conduct such interviews when you're
sitting in front of a world leader that
some millions of people consider evil,
or if you're sitting in front of people
that are actual like convicted
criminals,
what's the way to conduct that
interview? Because to me, I want to
understand that human being. They also
have their own narrative about why
they're good and why they're
misunderstood and they have a story in
which they're not evil and they're going
to try to tell that story and some of
them are exceptionally good at telling
that story. So if it's for public
consumption,
how would you do that interview? I think
it's important to speak with people whom
we or whom a lot of people dehumanize,
including myself. I mean I also speak
with people who I think are or have I
know have committed terrible crimes and
I have spoken to these people as a
criminal psychologist that's often part
of my job. So what's interesting I think
when you're speaking to people who have
committed really terrible crimes or
certainly who've been convicted of
terrible crimes is that not only is it
potentially insightful because they
might give you a real answer and not
just a controlled narrative about why
they committed these crimes. If they are
either maintaining their innocence or
they're more reluctant to do that, I
think even the narrative that they are
controlling that they're being very
careful with still tells us a lot about
them. So I think certainly my research
on environmental crime as well, what we
see is that people use a lot of
rationalization and they say things like
well everybody's doing it and if I
hadn't done this first somebody else
would have done this waste crime or this
other kind of crime and so there's this
rationalization there's this
normalization there's this diminishing
of your own role and agency and that
still tells us a lot about psychology of
people who commit crimes because
most of us are very bad at saying sorry
and saying I messed this up and I
shouldn't have done that and instead
what our brains do is they try to make
us feel better and they go no you're
still good person despite this one thing
and so
we try to rationalize it we try to
excuse it we try to explain it and there
is some truth to it as well because we
know the reasons why we engage in that
behavior and other people don't have the
whole context so we also do have more of
the whole story but on the other hand we
need to also that sometimes we do
terrible things and we need to stop
doing those terrible things and prevent
other people from doing the same.
I find this
these pictures of World War leaders as
children kind of fascinating because it
it grounds you makes you realize that
there is a whole story there of
environment
of development through their childhood
through their teenage years
you just remember they're all kids. Mhm.
Except Stalin he was looking evil
already when young. Well people used to
not smile in photos as well so I think
looking at historical photos of children
or sometimes even kids in other cultures
it's like oh why are they all so
serious?
But our creepiness radars are also way
off so this is something that I've been
interested in for a long time as well is
that we have this intuitive perception
of whether or not somebody is
trustworthy and that intuitive
perception according to ample studies at
this point is not to be trusted and one
thing in particular is whether or not we
think someone is creepy including
children but usually the research is
done of course on adult faces and with
adults. And there's only recently did we
even really define what that vague
feeling of creepiness is and it has a
lot to do with just not following social
norms and this is something we see that
transfers to other contexts like why
people are afraid of people with severe
mental illness and psychosis. If you're
on the the bus or the tube in London and
someone's talking to themselves and
they're acting in an erratic way we know
that people are more likely to keep a
distance. There was one study where they
literally had a waiting room where they
also had people with chairs and the
question was how many chairs would you
sit away from someone you know has a
severe mental illness and the answer is
you sit more chairs away and there's a
physical and psychological distancing
that's happening there and it's not
because people with severe mental
illness are inherently more violent or
more dangerous that is not actually what
the research finds it's that we perceive
them as such because we perceive them as
weird basically. We go this isn't how
you're supposed to be behaving and so
I'm worried about this and so I'm going
to keep my distance and so creepiness is
much the same and that's where you can
totally misfire whom you perceive as
creepy just because they're not acting
in the way that you expect people to act
in society. Well what are the sort of
concrete features that contribute to our
creepiness metric? Is that meme accurate
that when the person is attractive
you're less likely to label them as
creepy?
It depends if they're too attractive it
can be so there's
there's effects that interact there
and we also don't trust people
potentially who are too attractive
but again deviation from the norm and so
if you're deviating in any way that can
lead to
well your your assessment being more
wrong but also you assessing people as
more
negative and so with yeah but with
creepiness the the main thing that
bothers me as a criminal psychologist is
that tangential to creepiness is this
general idea of trustworthiness and that
you can tell whether somebody is lying
and I've done research on this as have
lots of other people like Aldert Vrij is
one of the leading researchers on
deception detection
and he has found in so many studies that
is really hard to detect whether someone
is lying reliably and that people
especially police officers people who do
investigative interviewing
they have this high confidence level
that they because of their vast
experience can in fact tell whether the
person across from them is lying to them
this witness this suspect and the answer
that even that if you take them into
experimental settings they are no better
than chance at detecting lies and yet
they think they are and so again you get
into this path where you're going to
miss people who are actually lying to
you potentially and you're going to
potentially point at innocent people and
say I think you're guilty of this crime
and you go hard on that person in a way
that might even lead to a wrongful
conviction.
So it's the fact that it's very
difficult to detect lies and
overconfidence
in policing
creates a huge problem. Not just
policing in relationships and in lots of
other contexts as well. I mean a lot of
jealousy is born out of uncertainty.
Jealousy isn't I know for sure that you
have done something that is threatening
our relationship a lot of jealousy is
what's in my head because I am assuming
that you might be thinking or doing X
and that is also basically an exercise
in lie detection and there as well we
are very bad at it. Is there a
combination of uh
the dark tetrad and how good you are at
lying? Like are people with the certain
traits maybe psychopathy are better
lying than others? There's definitely
some research to support the idea that
people with psychopathy are better at
lying. There's also some research
specifically on faking good in for
example parole decisions so when it
comes up to someone who is
there's a legal decision to be made as
to whether this person going to be
released from prison or released from
just detention in general and then the
person will act in a particular way sort
of mimic a good prisoner mimic someone
who's safe to be released into society
and then the committee goes oh well you
know this this person's doing great and
so they're ready to to be released and
then they make the wrong decision
because that person has been faking it.
So I think with psychopathy it's a bit
complicated it's
there has been some sort of historically
as well some concern that certain
treatment for psychopathy especially
empathy focused treatment makes people
with psychopathy more likely to fake
empathy and to weaponize it. But then
there's other research which finds that
if you use other kinds of interventions
like Jennifer Skeem in California who
does research on people with psychopathy
who have committed severe crimes and she
specifically creates these treatment
programs that aren't just around empathy
but they're more around almost learning
the rules of society and convincing
people that actually being pro-social is
a better way to get what you want in
life and so there's there's a real need
for tailored treatments to deal with
especially certain kinds of personality
traits dark personality traits to try
and convince people basically actually
being pro-social is a better path rather
than just going hard on you know empathy
and things that they don't maybe also
see as faults with themselves.
Is there a psychological cost to
empathizing with
so-called monsters?
You reference Nietzsche in the book you
know gaze into the abyss the abyss gazes
into you. If you uh study
quote unquote evil or study monsters it
you may a bit become that. Is there a
danger of that?
I don't think so. I think that's what
people fear. So a lot of the Nietzsche
quotes I use as well are some of them I
like because they speak to the chapters
I write about but and the issues I write
about but some of them I also like
because they are how people think about
evil and people who are labeled evil and
I do think with gazing into the abyss
and the abyss gazing back it's more of a
you're trying to find it and that's why
in some ways that doesn't work actually
because it isn't a total blank it isn't
the abyss there are in fact things that
you can see even even if it's just
superficially and patterns you can
recognize to help you and key decision
makers especially in legal settings make
better decisions around people like
this. So when they see these patterns
they act a better way.
So yeah I I I get asked a lot as a
criminal psychologist do you carry the
cases that you deal around with you? So
some of the cases involve you know huge
amounts of witnesses huge amounts of
potential victims and so in these cases
there are very visceral descriptions
sometimes of heinous crimes and
I think that as someone who does this
work you can't be someone who sees it as
anything other than a puzzle.
So you have to look at it and go, here's
the different pieces of information.
What I am doing is pattern recognition.
I'm not here to emotionally invest in
each of these victims or potential
victims. That's not my role. There's
therapists for that. There's other
people who do that work. I am here
working with the police. I'm here
working with lawyers. I'm here looking
at it more sort of objectively to see
how this all fits together. And so I
think that's how I engage with it. I see
it as this this puzzle that I'm trying
to figure out. I worry for my own brain
that when I confront people and see them
as a puzzle, which I do,
I see the beauty in the puzzle. All the
puzzles look beautiful to me. I'm
sometimes
uh like a Prince Myshkin character from
The Idiot by Dostoevsky where you just
see
it's not the good in people, but the
beauty in the puzzle.
And I think
you can lose your footing on the moral
landscape if you see the beauty in
everything a bit too much.
Because like everyone is interesting.
Everyone is complicated. It's the
classic scientist response as well to
what other people in society go, "Ooh."
They go, you know, "This is horrible."
Or this atrocious thing has happened or
this shocking existential
crisis-inducing thing I've just found
is, you know, giving me existential
crisis. Um and scientists and they go,
"Wow." And you can sort of see the
delight in discovery as well. And I
think sometimes scientists read as
callous because we enjoy the discovery
of knowledge and the discovery of
insights. And it just feels like this
little light bulb has gone off and you
go, "I understand a tiny bit more about
the human experience or about the world
around us." And I think it must be
similar. I don't I don't know that I
feel or worry that I sort of become more
quote-unquote evil. I think it's more
that you add this nuance which I guess
sometimes can be estranging to other
people. So there's that. So when you
speak with others, sometimes like even
when I say we shouldn't use the word
evil, people go, "No, but you have to.
Does that mean you're trivializing
things?" And the answer is no, I'm not
trivializing. I'm just trying to
understand. Also like sympathizing or
being empathetic towards people whom
others have written off um is always
going to get that response from some
people. And I mean there are real
questions around whom we're platforming
and what that has and what role we have
as content creators, both of us, of the
people we talk about, how we cover them.
Um I often come across this in true
crime work that I do cuz I get asked to
do TV shows. I host TV shows and I host
um BBC podcasts. And there's always the
question of sometimes people commit
murder to become famous. And should it
be a blanket ban that we don't cover
those cases? Or should we cover those
cases but in a different way? Or should
we anonymize the So there's it doesn't
mean that you shouldn't never cover that
case. It just means that you need to
think about it. Speaking of which,
you've done a lot of really great stuff,
podcast shows. Uh one of them is Bad
People podcast. You co-hosted it. It has
over 100 episodes. Each covering a
crime. What's maybe the most disturbing
crime you've covered? One of the most
disturbing crimes that we covered on Bad
People. And just to be clear, Bad
People, much like the title Evil, is
sort of tongue in cheek where the idea
is it's people whom we refer to as bad
people. And then it's always a question
of like who are these quote-unquote bad
people and are we all capable of doing
these terrible things? But one of the
most certainly problematic dark cases
that we covered was the Robert Pickton
case. And the episodes are called
Piggy's Palace because that was the
nickname for the farm where Robert
Pickton brought victims whom he had
kidnapped. And then he killed them and
he did terrible things to their bodies.
And uh rumors have it certainly that he
fed some of these victims to pigs. Now,
one of the reasons I covered that case
is actually because it was influential
in my own career. So Robert Pickton is
one of the most famous Canadian serial
killers of all time. And as I was doing
my undergrad at Simon Fraser University
in Canada, I was being taught by someone
called Stephen Hart. And Stephen Hart
was an expert witness on the Robert
Pickton trial. And so he was keeping us
abreast of some of the developments of
what he was covering. And it I found it
so interesting. And I loved Stephen Hart
as a person and he seemed to have this
sense of humor, this gallows humor,
around it all despite being faced with
one of the arguably worst people in
Canadian history. And I thought that
that was so interesting that someone
could be so nice and so kind and so
wonderful and be an expert witness for
these kinds of people. And so that's one
of the reasons I went to the field is
because of this case as well.
And so we had him on the show. So he
came on to Bad People and we interviewed
him for it. Uh and he has done um I
imagine a lot of really difficult cases.
Yes, he's done a lot of difficult cases
as have other researchers like Elizabeth
Loftus who's one of the main founders of
the area false memory research, which is
what I also do. I do research on memory
and false memory and witness statements.
And Elizabeth Loftus has also been uh
recently asked for the Ghislaine Maxwell
uh case. She was in the press. And so
she has worked with lawyers to educate
the court on memory
in lots of really, really controversial
cases. But the way she would explain it
is that it's still her role to just
train people and teach people on how
memory works. She's not there to decide
whether people are guilty or innocent.
But she is there to help people
distinguish between fact and fiction
when it comes to how our memories work
or don't. So what kind of person feeds
their victims to pigs? What's
interesting about that psychology?
The psychology about Robert Pickton, uh
I mean he was a tricky person because I
think he was profoundly lonely. And this
is something we see with a lot of serial
killers is that um they have this
loneliness which I think also not only
contributes to them committing the
crimes in the first place, but also
allows them to get away with things
because they don't have as much of a
social network or any social network
that is helping them to do what's called
reality monitoring, to understand what's
true and what's not. And so when you see
people get radicalized in their own
thoughts, whether that's in sense in the
sense of things like schizophrenia where
you've got psychosis, you've got
delusions, maybe command hallucinations.
That's when you think you're hearing
voices and someone is telling you that
you have to do something, usually
something harmful to other people. And
if you don't follow those, you will hear
those voices forever. They're profoundly
distressing and they are one of the
aspects of schizophrenia that if you
have it, does make you more prone to
violence. And so for these kinds of
cases, if you don't have someone
intervening, whether that's a family
member or a therapist saying,
"How how can you tell whether this
thought is real? Maybe that thought.
Maybe you're not hearing that voice."
Right? Maybe that aspect of what you're
thinking isn't true and bringing you
back and closer to reality, you can just
wander off to whatever
alternate universe that you might live
in in your head. And it's the same with
radicalization in other contexts is that
you see that people who drift more and
more into a certain group that has
certain beliefs that are maybe divorced
from the evidence, divorced from
reality, you can see that people well,
get more extreme over time. And unless
you have a tether that brings you back,
that allows you to do reality
monitoring, it's going to be very
difficult to to find your way out of
that. So with serial killers, we find
this reality monitoring problem and I
think part of that's related to the lack
of social networks that people have.
That's fascinating. So that's one
important component of serial killers.
What else can we say about the
psychology, what motivates them? So if
you look at some of the famous
serial killers, Ted Bundy, John Wayne
Gacy, Jeffrey Dahmer. Is there other
things we could say about their
psychology that motivates them? So
interesting, the tether to reality. I
mean loneliness is a part of the human
condition. It is in fact one of its side
effects is you can get untethered.
And then with some of these brains, I
guess the untethered goes to some dark
place.
The untethered goes to a dark place and
it's then is often combined with some of
these other dark tetrad traits. So
you've got someone who maybe is high on
psychopathy, low on empathy, someone
who's high on sadism, someone who thinks
that it's okay to pursue your own goals.
And your own goal can be uh
like with Jeffrey Dahmer,
um you can be wanting to create the
perfect partner, which in some ways
seems to be what he was trying to do by
killing people and piecing them together
and sewing up a sort of new version.
There's something in that where I can't
help but go,
"That's so sad." I don't go, "Oh my god,
how terrible how awful." And of course
it's atrocious. Of course it's heinous.
But I have this real sympathy for that.
And I think that's important for us to
have though and not to say,
"I can't relate to this person at all."
But to say that is an extreme
manifestation of something I have felt.
And the difference between me engaging
in that and this person engaging that
are these other factors. But the core is
is in all of us.
Do you think all of us are capable of
evil?
Of some of the things we label as evil?
I think all of us are capable of doing
basically the worst things we can
imagine. And one of the reasons I think
that is because you can see neighbors
turning on each other, especially if you
look historically at the start of wars
or um big political moments where you
have people who would have called each
other friends turning each other into
the police, uh killing each other, doing
terrible things. So I think all it takes
is to become convinced that the people
you think are your friends are actually
your enemies, whether that's just in
your own world or in a larger political
national landscape. That I think I don't
think it takes all that much for us to
be capable of doing terrible things. But
that's also why it's really important
when things are good and when you're not
at war and when you have the capacity to
think deeply about important issues, to
train your mind on these thoughts of
knowing that things like loneliness can
manifest in these extreme ways, that
things like uh jealousy and aggression,
that they can turn into murder, that
they can turn into these horrible
versions. And to then also spot the red
flags if you start going down that path.
I think if we don't rehearse
evil, if you will,
we are much more likely to engage in it,
especially in those moments where we
don't have much time or energy to really
think about what we're doing.
Yeah, I really appreciate the way you
think and the way you talk about this.
Listening to history, when I'm reading
history books, I imagine myself
like doing the thing I'm reading about.
And I almost always can imagine that.
Like when I'm honest with myself.
And it's important to admit that to
ourselves. And research on murder
fantasies finds that most men have
fantasized about killing someone, about
70% in two studies. And most women as
well, more than 50% of women have
fantasized about killing somebody. So
murder fantasies are incredibly common
and certainly according to some
researchers,
that's a good thing. Being able to
rehearse and think through doing the
most terrible things is it's a great
dress rehearsal for also how we don't
want to live our lives. And only if you
are able to fully think through what
would I actually be like if I was
engaging in this. What would I be
thinking? Who would I be with? What
would be my
the group that I'm charging against this
other person,
you know, who who am I there with? As
you said, like really putting yourself
in the shoes of these
people who've done terrible things.
That is how you also realize that you do
not want those consequences.
And so yeah, you maybe want to murder
this person, but you don't really want
to murder this person. That's that in-
intuitive sort of animalistic brain
coming in. But then luckily we have
higher reasoning that goes, "Actually,
if you think this through, that's a
pretty terrible consequence for
yourself. So the better thing to do is
not to murder this person." So I think
it's adaptive to be able to fantasize
and think about these things.
Obviously, if you start getting to a
point where you're ruminating and you're
going in these circles where you're
constantly fantasizing about doing dark
things, especially to a specific person,
I'd always advise seeing somebody to
talk to a psychologist, for example,
because that then does become a risk
factor for acting on those dark
fantasies. But up to that point, if it's
just a fleeting thought or something
that sort of in one day you had these
thoughts, that is totally healthy, I
would say.
And also I think it's useful to simulate
or think through what it would take
to say no in that situation.
Meaning
once you're able to imagine yourself
doing evil things, you have to imagine
the difficult act of resisting.
A lot of people think they would resist
in Nazi Germany.
Well, most people didn't.
And there's a reason for that.
Um it's not easy. Same reason I've seen
this, if something bad is happening on a
public street, most people, it's the
bystander effect. Most people just stand
there and watch.
I've seen it once in my life.
Yeah, this is humans. So it's actually
you want to simulate
stepping up.
Yes, it's also been called the heroic
imagination. So someone who has studied
evil, quote unquote, at length is called
Philip Zimbardo. He did the Stanford
prison experiment and that was an
experiment which is, I mean it's now
been torn apart in various ways. I It
was absolutely influential for
psychology. It's where participants were
randomly assigned whether they would be
prisoners or guards in a mock prison
experiment and then for a number of days
they were told to
do various things and it got out of
control and the guards went way over
what they were supposed to be doing and
they effectively started
pseudo torturing some of these
um inmates or these pretend inmates. And
the whole thing had to be stopped
prematurely, but it was really
fundamental in showing how just by
randomly being assigned into guard, the
person in charge, or inmate, you can
within a matter of days have a
completely different way of thinking
about one another. And so Philip
Zimbardo has also spoken at length about
evil and that all of us are capable of
it in the right circumstances, but he
also is a big proponent of what he calls
the heroic imagination. And the heroic
imagination is really what the purpose
of everything I do is. The purpose of
what I do isn't just to go, "Ooh, this
is curious." and to stop there. The
point is to then prevent it. And to
prevent it in ourselves, because that's
I think ultimately what has to happen.
You can't do a top-down sort of
government level approach to trying to
be so tough on crime that no one will
ever commit crime, that's impossible.
But you can change sort of to say it in
a tacky way, the hearts and minds of
individuals to recognize the pathways
towards evil and to go, "Wait, I'm I'm
off track. I don't want to go this way
and I'm going to stop myself here and
here's how I can find my way back."
And so the heroic imagination is
exercising that. I see someone on the
street, how do I make sure that they're
okay? How do I not become a bystander?
Actually, the bystander stuff is
interesting because there was a really
famous case, the murder of Kitty
Genovese, and there were all of these
both ear and eyewitnesses. So an
earwitness is someone who just hears
things and an eyewitness is someone who
sees the crime happening. And they
didn't intervene in the murder of this
woman. And so this case was often taken
as this
almost example of, "Look how terrible
human beings are. We just walk by. We
don't care about what's happening to
strangers on the streets."
And actually what's happened since is
that there's been lots of other
bystander experiments and they have not
substantiated this. So we need to be
very careful with looking at these
extreme cases and going, "How horrible
that this happened to this one person."
And it is,
but that doesn't mean that that's always
how it happens. And so actually what we
find in bystander research is that most
of the time bystanders do intervene.
It's just when there has already been a
crowd that has accumulated, you read the
room and you assume, "Well, nobody else
has intervened yet." And so it must not
be a real problem. That desire to not
stand out in a negative way is often
what hinders
heroicism. I mean that's why we look at
heroes, people who especially risk their
own lives to save others, especially
strangers.
We see them with a sort of respect that
nobody else gets. And that's because we
recognize that we might not be capable
of that. If I saw a stranger drowning in
a river, would I really risk my life get
jumping in the river to maybe save them?
I I think that's a big question mark.
And so
when people do that, especially when
people almost have this
inherent reaction that they just jump
in, they just go for it. That is
something that is a really admirable
quality and that we as humans do
celebrate and we should. And I think
often we should celebrate those
incidents more and not the, you know,
the bystander moments where we didn't
intervene. We should be normalizing
intervening. And again, again this idea
of heroic imagination,
actually simulating, imagining yourself
sta- standing up and saving the person
when a crowd is watching them drowning,
to be the one that does and tries to
help.
Uh you mentioned
this is 70% of men and some large
percentage of women fantasized about
murder.
And I also
uh read that you wrote that recidivism
for homicide is only 1 to 3%.
So
that raises the question, why do people
commit murder?
Murder is a really interesting crime
because most of the time it's
perpetrated for reasons that we don't
like as a society. So as a person who
talks a lot to uh the news and also to
producers who are trying to make true
crime shows, who don't necessarily have
a deep understanding of psychology,
let's just say, and who come at you with
myths where you go, "Ooh, no, we're not
we're not going to talk about that.
We're not going to talk about whether or
not the mom is to blame for this person
killing somebody." Um I hate that ex-
That's one of my my least favorite sort
of the trauma narrative of all people
who do terrible things must have had a
terrible childhood, I think is really
problematic. What really happens in
murder most of the time, which is not
what you see on TV because it's really
boring, is it's a fight that gets out of
control. And if you look at the real
reasons stated, it's things like, "This
person owed me $4 and so I killed him.
This person stole my bike. This person I
mean, it's these really stupid reasons.
And it is just this bad decision in the
moment, an overreaction to a fight, to
an argument and it wasn't planned. It's
not some psychopaths sharpening their
knives waiting for months to try and
kill this person. And we don't like that
because there's something called the
victimization gap, which is that the
impact of this extreme situation on the
perpetrator, there's a huge gap between
that and the impact on the victim and
their family. So the victim loses a
life, whereas the perpetrator, sure they
get imprisoned, but that at best, right?
If you will, if any terms of justice,
but they don't have the same kinds of
consequences. And we don't like that. We
like things that have extreme
consequences to have extreme reasons.
And so that's why I think there's this
real desire to show serial killers and
to show people who are in fact planning
murders for a really long time and then
engage in them, rather than this fight
that goes out of control or someone
drink driving or someone who is uh I
mean, unfortunately, intimate partner
homicide is also one of those situations
that is common.
Um one of the top four reasons for
murder as well.
Um but
that's not the almost glamorized version
that we see of murder online or that we
see in the news.
So, I think it's always important to
talk about murder as something that is
rarely inherent to an individual. Very
few people want to murder. They might
fantasize about it, but they don't want
to go through with it. And very few
people who do engage in murder wanted to
do it in that instance, never mind
again.
I think in general we have the way that
we look at lots of crimes upside down.
So, we put murderers in prison for a
really long time because we think that
that's justice.
Which is sure, that's one version where
it's an eye for an eye kind of you know,
you life for life.
There's obviously the more extreme
version of that, which is the death
penalty, which I don't adhere to, but I
could see the rationalization of well,
you you stole somebody else's life, so
you don't deserve to have one.
But there's also the other side, which
is if we're looking at prevention,
murderers really like they're not going
to people aren't going to go and murder
again. So, that is that's a really low
risk in terms of recidivism, actually.
And high risk are things like fraud and
elder abuse and sexual violence. And so,
in some ways sometimes our sanctions are
upside down in terms of
how we can actually make society safer.
And they're in line more just with how
we perceive justice to work. So, there
there's big fundamental questions about
how we organize our justice systems and
what we want them to be for.
Can you just wing on that a bit? So, how
should we think about everything you
just described for
how our criminal justice system
forgives? If they're a very unlikely to
murder again, how would you reform the
criminal justice system?
I think forgiveness is up to the
victims' families. And quite often when
you speak with victims' families, there
is this divide where you have some who
are much more keen on something called
restorative justice, which is where they
what they want is for the person to
apologize, the perpetrator to apologize,
to explain how it happened. Also quite
often, I mean, you look at the some of
the other consequences in the other
context. It's sort of like teenage boys
who are part of gangs, for example, is
the other context. And it's a teenage
boy killing another teenage boy. Like
these are kids. And the parents of a
teenage boy understand that. This isn't
you know, they don't think of this other
perpetrator as this grown man who has I
don't know. It I think we think of it as
this fight between the parents of both
teenage boys in that case. But really
often what parents want is to just
understand how this could happen.
And in some ways to allow the other
teenage boy to still have a life and to
not steal theirs as well or his as well.
So, there's that restorative justice
model where forgiveness I think belongs
to the families. Some families, of
course, want the most extreme
punishment. That's also I can understand
how that would be a a response that's
triggered if you've suffered a severe
loss.
But if we're looking to make society
safer, putting people who've killed in
prison
is actually not the answer, right?
Because
if we want society to be safer, it
should be based purely on what is most
likely to deter crime and who is most
likely to engage in it. And that's where
I think we've got it upside down.
If I could just stick to the Bad People
podcast,
there's an episode on incels called
Black Pill, Are Incels Dangerous? So,
are they dangerous? What's the
psychology of incels?
So, that episode was all about what it
means to espouse certain kinds of views,
especially about women, and what it
means to be in an environment that is
fueling the fire of
well, hatred of gender. And so, and and
the idea of entitlement. So, I think
one thing that we see often in crimes of
all sorts, actually, is that drives the
perception that I'm allowed to engage in
X because of something else. And I
deserve to have a life that looks like
this, but I don't, and so I'm going to
go take it or I'm going to go do
something
to show my dissatisfaction in life. And
so, if you think that all men deserve to
have a happy life, sort of a Disney
version,
um with with a woman at home who's
taking care of the kids, and this is
sort of white picket fence ideal that
we've been sold. We have been told that
that is what we should have. Like I I I
understand where it comes from. And
the question though is
are we entitled to that or is that the
idea that that's something we should
strive towards? And I think the answer
is no. Nobody's entitled to a good life.
I would like to see freedoms and rights
manifest in such a way that everyone is
able to achieve the kind of life that
they themselves want.
But you're not entitled to it. And so,
that's where I think it can get a bit
crossed and we can be sold these lies
that are basically impossible for
everybody in society to achieve. And
and understandably people get angry. And
if you're angry and if you feel entitled
and if you're in this group where
everyone else is thinking the same way
as you, yeah, that can make you
dangerous. And the internet gives you a
mechanism
to be your worst self.
And it can reinforce that worst self.
You see other people saying, "Yeah, I
feel the same way. Do you want Do you
want me to help you?"
Oh, the internet.
Uh so, one more episode, you interviewed
the lady uh Cecilia who got Tinder
swindled. Can Can you tell what happened
with the Tinder swindle situation? So,
Tinder Swindler, that was a person who
pretended on Tinder to be a rich guy who
had this lavish lifestyle and he would
match with women on Tinder and very
quickly love bomb them. So, he would
send them all kinds of messages and
immediately start
being very emotional, very sharing,
pretend that he's
messaging from his private jet or
actually message from his private jet,
but pretend that he's in love with this
person very quickly. And then he would
invite women, in this case Cecilia, to
very expensive luxurious dates. So, he
would whisk them away to Paris or he
would show them his private jet or he
would take them to a really expensive
restaurant almost to prove that he in
fact is this really wealthy guy.
And
he would simultaneously be building up
this story of a future together. And you
see this in people who
are really problematic in relationships
in a lot of way. I mean, this is not
just in scams or in criminal settings,
but problematic relationship styles
often involve someone who is creating
this
idea of a future together that you can
just see it now, you know, our kids in
the garden running around. Um you're the
only one for me. That kind of language
like planning your wedding on the third
date. That kind of thing is what he
would weaponize and she, Cecilia, wa-
was looking for love. She wanted all of
those things and so it worked really
well. And what he ended up doing is
defrauding her of lots of money. And she
ended up taking out loans and her family
were giving her money to help what he
was saying was this critical situation,
very classic fraud. It's critical
situation where he was being followed,
he was under attack, and he needed her
to pay for some things. He needed her to
pay for some flights. Until she ran out
of money and then
then then she realized that this all was
a big fraud. This was a a love scam.
So, the reason that we spoke with her is
partly to show
how it can happen. And I think it's
really important to remind people that
this is something everybody is capable
of
believing.
Fraud works because people know what we
want to hear and they tell us the things
we want to hear. And so, I think all of
us there's a tailored version of fraud
that could appeal to basically everybody
if they have enough information about
you.
Yeah, and by the way, now in modern day
AI could probably better and better do
that kind of thing. Just do the tailored
version of the story that you want to
believe.
And
love is a topic on which that would be
especially effective.
Yeah, cuz you're playing with people's
emotions and you know that they're
vulnerable in that way. And most people
want to be loved and want to love. And
so, it's a it's a really manipulative
way in and it's I think it's really
horrible, but it's also
something that we all
almost underestimate. So, we think I
would identify fraud. I would know if
someone's trying to scam me of money
until it happens to us and then we go,
"Oh, wait. That that that did just
happen." And then we get really
embarrassed. And so, I think talking
about it is really important and seeing
it as not this thing that happens to
dumb people. Cuz that is sometimes how
it's framed as like, "Oh, such an idiot.
She was so gullible." Was she? Or was
she just a nice person who wanted to
believe that this person was capable of
loving her, which I would hope we all
are. Yeah. And I hope she and others
that fall victim to that kind of thing
don't become cynical and keep trying.
Yeah.
That's right. That's right.
>> Those kinds of things can really destroy
your
ability to be vulnerable to the world.
But I mean, it sounds like this the same
kind of thing is just commonplace in all
kinds of relationships. That's the
puzzle of it. It could be
if you find yourself inside of a toxic
relationship
with the quote love bombing, it could be
a lot of manipulative fraud type of
things, right? Inside of relationship
and the spectrum.
>> Well, and course of control is becoming
more of an issue where that's when
somebody, for example, in a relationship
takes control of the finances. And
that's often
a man in a relationship. That's sort of
traditionally cuz it falls often along
these gender gender lines. But the
problem is if that person then starts to
weaponize the fact that they're
controlling the finances and starts
using words like, "I'm going to give you
your allowance." instead of going,
"You've paid as much into this as I have
and so this is our shared money."
um and starts using that and controlling
things and controlling how the other
person
lives in that relationship, that's when
you get into things that are called
coercive control. Um and things like
jealousy can also be used in that way.
Is there any way out of that?
Maybe the the the jealousy
study. Or is this is this a vicious
downward spiral? Whenever there's any
kinds of signs like this,
that means you're uh
screwed, get out.
Or is this just the puzzle of the human
condition and humans getting together
and having to solve that puzzle?
I have non-traditional views on
jealousy. Um I'm not a jealousy
researcher, but I have done some
research on sexuality.
Um and I
personally think that jealousy is
basically always a red flag. Because
what it means is that the person who is
jealous isn't secure in the
relationship. And the reason that
they're not secure in the relationship
is either because the relationship is
wrong for them or because they are
insecure in themselves. And I don't
think it is a sign of love. I don't
think it is a sign of, you know, you
want to protect your mate. I think it is
mostly control. And it's the desire to
control and to possess. And jealousy we
know is a precursor to intimate partner
violence almost always. As in not all
jealousy leads to violence, of course,
but all violence uh is the jealousy is a
precursor. Um and quite a lot of that
imagined things that the the partner is
doing not even based on reality. There
we go back to our deception detection
research where we're bad at telling
whether someone's lying or not. And so
if you're basing how you're interacting
with that person on a faulty lie
detector, you're going to make bad
decisions. So the research also bears
out that most people are really bad at
monogamy.
So most people either have cheated on a
significant other, maybe not their
current significant other, but a
significant other, um or have cheated
multiple times. And that's
that's just consistently found in the
research.
>> So maybe there's justification to be
jealous. I think it's the other way
around. I think monogamy is setting us
up to fail.
So I think monogamy is a social
construct that's a nice idea for some
people. And I think that at least based
on the research on how people actually
behave, they're not actually behaving in
a monogamous way. If you're cheating on
your partner, that is not monogamy. That
is polyamory potentially. So the love of
multiple people. Um
and it's lying and it and it's
it doesn't have to be that way. So I'm
polyamorous and I I believe that you can
love multiple people. I don't know that
everyone is always going to meet lots of
people at the same time that they're
going to love.
Um but I think that there's been a move
towards more and people embracing open
relationships and non-traditional
relationship structures. And I think
that is
healthy to at least have as an option. I
think the idea that there's this
one-size-fits-all for relationships is
really harmful to a lot of people and it
just doesn't really work for everybody.
Well, if we could just focus in on one
component, it seems to be one of the
problems is
honesty as a hard requirement and good
communication
as another hard requirement. Cuz that
feels like uh
the prerequisites for avoiding all these
problems. And I guess with jealousy,
what I'm thinking of is actually not an
instance of jealousy. So where you have
a feeling of
I feel left out or I feel um it's more
that sort of persistent feeling of I am
a jealous person. Um and that's where I
would say that is usually a red flag. Um
and you're right, it might it's a red
flag partly because it means the
person's probably bad at communicating
or or you are as a couple. Like it's not
necessarily just the jealous person's
fault.
Um it's just that there's something
happening in this dynamic that is that
is bad psychologically and that should
be addressed or maybe it's not the right
relationship. So the fact that a lot of
people cheat,
does that mean every single person that
cheated, does that mean they're
probably not going to be good at
monogamy? I I guess if you can just
analyze all of human civilization as it
stands and give advice that's
definitively true for everyone.
Well, that's exactly what psychologists
do all the time. We make sweeping
statements. This is great. No, I just I
I think it's really interesting cuz I
see all those things as romantic,
choosing not to cheat, you choosing to
dedicate yourself fully to another
person. And it's all this
romantic and then some people do cheat
and your heart is broken and you write a
song about it and then you move on and
you try to repair yourself and be
vulnerable to another human being and
all that.
>> But why deny yourself the beautiful
spectrum of human expe- I mean, it's
like eating one meal for the rest of
your life. Like why? You don't you don't
have to do that. You could just you can
have lots of beautiful people around and
uh
>> But what's also for me, actually
focusing on a single thing, you get to
explore, you mentioned puzzle,
over time you get to see the nuance.
Like the beauty of the puzzle. You you
you realize it's an infinitely long
project to really understand another
human being. And so like if you focus,
you don't get distracted.
So that applies I'm I'm a person when I
find when I find a meal I really like,
I'll stick to it for for a long time.
I'm definitely a monogamy person, I
think. But that also could be a
component of like where I grew up. You
know, there's a certain cultural
upbringing and maybe my brain is not
allowing
myself certain possibilities,
you know?
I think it's more that I want people to
feel like they have a choice.
And that's the important thing. And I
think all we see is monogamy everywhere
all the time. And it's this one version
of how we can live our lives and I think
it's not the only and I think that
having conversations with your partner
as well, especially early. It's harder
to bring this up later on.
Um but to have it early and say, you
know, how do you actually want to
structure your life? And I think how do
you want to re- structure your
relationship is part of that. And
especially if you're going to commit
yourself to one person, one primary
person or one exclusive person, um
that's that's part of it. And I think
then you're also, you know, don't have
to lie to each other if you do cheat or
you can talk about it in a different way
if you feel like there's, you know,
certain capacity to to be honest about
whom you're attracted to and how that
might impact your life more generally.
So how difficult is polyamory? I think a
lot of people would be curious about
that kind of stuff. Does jealousy come
up?
Is it difficult to navigate? It can be.
I mean, all relationships can be
difficult to navigate.
>> True. I think it's the same. It's And
the same risk factors. If you're going
in because you're trying to fix
something about yourself, you're going
to have a hard time. Much like if you're
dating a single person, if you're trying
to fix something and this is going to be
the the solution to the thing that's you
feel is broken about yourself, it's
going to be hard. But if you're going in
coming from a good place and you're
going,
you know, I want to be open and I want
to connect with people and I want to
love people or person,
um then you're going to have a better
time. What's like the perfect
polyamorous relationship look like? Is
it can you really love multiple people
deeply? I think so. You can love people
in different ways and also you can love
lots of people deeply, I think. And I
think again, it's it's the research on
bisexuality, so I'm bi,
um has also found that people who are bi
are more likely to be in um
non-traditional relationships. And one
of the reasons for that is probably also
because we constantly get asked to
justify our sexuality as well. And so if
constantly you're being asked if one
person's enough for you, if one gender's
enough for you, um if you're in a
relationship with one person, for
example, you know, if I'm in a
relationship with a man, you do you miss
women? And it's like, I don't ask you
that if you're in a relationship with a
woman, do you miss women? Like you
probably do, but that's just other women
than your partner. It has nothing to do
with being bi. And so I think there's
this
constant barrage of questions of what
does it mean? Is it real? How do you
choose? What does a relationship look
like? Do you constantly want threesomes?
Like there's this constant
hypersexualization also, especially of
women that we find in the research, that
can also lead to really negative
outcomes for mental health and for
things like risk of sexual violence. But
on the other hand, you've got bisexual
people themselves saying, "Yeah, but I
feel like I also have this superpower
that I can love more widely and gender
doesn't really matter in terms of whom
I'm capable of loving." And so
relationship structures almost come with
that conversation. It's not that we need
to be non-monogamous or that we need to
be in these kinds of relationships. It's
more that I think if you've engaged so
deeply with your sexuality, partly cuz
society's forced you to, then you're
also going to be thinking about
relationship structures more generally
and going, "Actually, I'm going to
choose this one." Yeah, that's
interesting. I mean, you're like sexual
preferences and uh relationship
structure preferences,
some of the choice has to do with how
society's going to respond to it. So if
you have to explain it every time you'd
go to a party,
you might maybe not want to do that
or talk about or at least be open about
it.
Yeah, I'm sure there's a lot of annoying
conversations you have to do with your
polyamorous. Like some of the which
you've you've mentioned. And yes,
there's effects of oversexualizing
the people involved.
Yeah. Or thinking they're lying. So with
men, so I I wrote a book called Bi: The
Hidden Culture, History, and Science of
Bisexuality. And I did that after I
created a bisexual research group. So I
wasn't a sexuality researcher, but as a
bi person and a scientist, I was
interested in the science of
bisexuality. And I couldn't really find
it. It was really hard to figure out
what people were actually learning about
bisexual people in comparison to other
kinds of queer people. And one of the
things I found is that the terms that
are used are not necessarily bi. And so
it could be things like plurisexual. So
if you type into Google Scholar the word
bisexual, you're going to get a lot of
confusing things. Also because bisexual
is used for like two sexes where you
have multiple sex or you can change. And
so they're they're bisexual.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, which is different entirely. Um
and so I think partly out of that,
researchers started using words like
plurisexual and omnisexual is another
one. And so if you're looking for
research on this, plurisexual is
probably the word.
Um What does omnisexual mean? It's the
same. It's just another another word
where it's all.
Sometimes pansexual is also used.
And again, the idea being that it's it's
all genders.
So how should we think about bi-
bisexuality?
Is it
fluid
like
day-to-day, month-to-month, year-to-year
fluid who you're attracted to or is it
at the same time have the capacity to be
attracted to anyone or attracted to
everyone?
What's the right way to think about it?
I think the right way to think about it
is that I'm not attracted to most
people, but I can be attracted to people
regardless of gender.
Much like you're probably not attracted
to most people, but you are attracted
people of a certain gender maybe.
And so that's it's the same as being
heterosexual in terms of
potentially my pool of people who might
might be interested it's just that the
gender is irrelevant. What's the biggest
thing that people misunderstand about
bisexuality?
The biggest thing that researchers find
people misunderstand about bisexuality
is that it's a phase and that it's this
idea that it's transient, that it's
always changing. And that it's a
stepping stone. So I think a lot of
people still see bisexuality as
on the way to gay town. Sort of like
you're you're on your way, but you
haven't quite committed and you're still
stuck in expectations of society. You
haven't quite let go yet, but really
you're gay. And that's especially true
for men. And so when you look at
research on bisexual men, which is
actually how the research started. So I
think now when we think of bisexuality,
we think of women. And it's true that
today twice as many women identify as
bisexual as men.
But if you look at the history of this
and the research on bisexuality over
time, it was the other way around. So
someone called Alfred Kinsey was one of
the first sexuality researchers in
recent history certainly. And he after
World War II did this really big study
of sexual behavior in the human male it
was called. He was a biologist himself
and so he thought in taxonomies and he
was doing research on gall wasps, so
insects. And this idea of human
sexuality was sort of thrown at him
after the war because there's also this
whole move to get people to well,
reproduce and to rebuild America. And so
sexuality was partly and sex
specifically was becoming more of an
area of interest both in terms of
research and in terms of policy and
funding. And so Alfred Kinsey was asked,
do you want to do a class on human
sexual behavior? And he was like, I know
nothing about this. And so he spent
about a year just listening to students'
questions about like what they want to
know about sex. And he realized that he
was looking for research to try and
build up this course that he was
probably going to teach and he realized
that he couldn't answer most of their
questions because the research hadn't
been done. And so a lot of the questions
were around what is normal?
You know, if I feel this during sex, is
that normal? How often do people have
sex? Should I want these? What about
these fantasies? What does it mean? What
if I have homosexual fantasies? What if
I engage in this kind of And so he was
looking at all of these questions and
collating them and then he went out and
did these huge studies.
And he interviewed thousands of people
himself, but also had all these research
assistants who were out there
interviewing people in America about
their sexual behavior, which
I mean, just picture the time. It's like
the 1940s.
This is quite a conservative time. I
mean, certainly more than we might
expect now. And here's this researcher
asking incredibly personal questions
about thousands and thousands and
thousands of people.
And
he ended up finding, and this is one of
the big findings in this book that he
published called Sexual Behavior in the
Human Male, which was a best seller for
an entire year. He sold out auditoriums.
They had to sometimes add the room next
to the room he was in because there was
so much desire, huh,
um, to go to his lectures about sex that
it
they had to like connect radios to other
halls to give people enough space to sit
down. He was basically a rock star and
again, I think this challenges a
misconception we have about sexuality
that we think of it as this sort of woke
thing now, that the rainbow flag and all
the stuff is sort of this this modern
invention almost. But if you that's this
is the 40s. This was happening. People
were going to these talks. People were
having these conversations. And he
created something called the Kinsey
scale.
And so the Kinsey scale is from zero to
six
and he found that it was not useful to
apply a binary to people's sexual
desires and sexual orientation. It was
more useful to put them on a continuum
because most people were not exclusively
homosexual or exclusively heterosexual.
Most people were somewhere in between.
And so zero was exclusively heterosexual
tendencies and six was exclusively
homosexual. And he would place people
based on all the things they told him
somewhere on the scale and about half of
men were somewhere in the middle, not
exclusively either.
And about a quarter of women.
Now think about the time. It was a very
conservative time. Well, and it's
post-war though. So I think
that mattered as well. So there's
something called a homosocial
environment which has nothing to do with
being gay. That has to do with being in
a situation where you are with people of
the same gender as you.
So a homosocial environment are things
like prisons where you only have men or
only have women. Um, war which at that
point they just had and so you have a
lot of men who are exclusively in the
company of men and maybe looking around
going
well, now that my options are different,
maybe I'm going to choose from this
pool.
Anyway, so he found that it was that way
around that a lot of people have these
fantasies or um,
or actions that they've engaged in. And
then there were other researchers, other
male researchers who found similar
things and then at some point in the 70s
it swapped and it felt like maybe more
people, more men were identifying as
gay.
And
there were maybe less people who were
would have called themselves bi and
suddenly this became a thing more for
women.
So I think that there's some social
things going on, there's some research
things going on, but actually bi men are
have been studied for a long time as
well. Okay, so you said a lot of
interesting things. So there is a
difference between the truth and the
socially acknowledged thing. So there's
social elements. I I don't know, this
might be anecdotal, but
I know a few women
uh, friends of mine who are identify as
bisexual. I don't know a single
guy friend who's identifies as bisexual.
They're either gay or straight. So
there's still a social thing going on.
Definitely.
>> Right. Definitely. And I think that
research consistently shows that
bisexual men
are more likely to identify as well, as
gay or straight.
>> Um, and gay well, it depends.
So if they have what you might refer to
as a homosexual lifestyle, so they
engage in sort of going to queer
parties, maybe go on Grindr or other gay
apps, that would be much more a
lifestyle thing where you've embraced
and you you see this part of your
identity that you are part of this queer
community.
It's much easier to say you're gay than
you are bi most often. Also because
there's
queerphobia within the queer community.
And so you might get gay men saying to a
bi man, "Ah, come on, you're act- I was
bi once." That's a classic. "I was bi
once." Or "Come on, you're actually
gay." It's the same that you get the
other way around with bi women is that
because it's seen as performative, the
idea being that bisexual women are doing
it for attention,
but the attention of men specifically,
that well, they're all going to go back
to men anyway and they're just doing it
it's a phase. It's a thing that they're
doing actually to be sexy to men, not
because they're actually interested in
women. And so there's this lesbian bi
thing going on which is often quite
hostile, not always, but often. And
there's this gay male bi thing that
going on which is different in nature,
but is also potentially hostile. So in
both, saying you're bi can be can be
problematic, but for men more so.
Do you like the Kinsey scale as a sort
of very simple reduction to
that there's a spectrum? I also saw the
Klein Sexual Orientation Grid that has a
few parameters like who you're attracted
to, how you're actually behaving, the
fantasies you have,
social preference, lifestyle
preferences, all that kind of stuff,
self-identification, what you actually
say publicly, all those different
dimensions.
Or is the Kinsey scale like pretty damn
good
approximation?
The Kinsey scale is a good start and the
Klein Grid I think is much more fun in
some ways. So the Klein Grid came out of
research by Alfred Kinsey
um
and others like Havelock Ellis, but we
won't get into him.
Um, and
Fritz Klein was male researcher doing
research also on bisexuality. He was
specifically a therapist and he was
looking at people who were struggling
with their sexuality. And so people
would show up in the 70s and 80s in his
practice and they would say, "I'm
struggling with my sexuality." And he
would say, "How can I help you?" And
they would say things like, "I wish I
wasn't interested in men and I'm a man."
And he would then work through sort of
what that means. Does that mean you
don't want to have these feelings? Does
that mean that you don't want to have
these attractions? Does that mean that
it's the the implications of like how
your friends and family will see you,
that's the problem? And so he created
this much more complex scale which I
think is really interesting for
everybody to, no matter what their
sexuality is because what it is is it
gets you to think about things like,
yeah, your sexual identity, easy.
Um, but it not just that, but in past,
present, and ideal.
And so, if you say, "Well, I used to
identify as straight, now I identify as
bisexual." And then I have in my head,
this doesn't mean that other people
think this, in my head, I have an ideal,
which could be straight, because that's
what maybe society's told us we should
be, but it could also be something else.
And so, I've also had friends who've
gone, you know, past, present, straight,
straight, but ideal bi. So, you get into
these interesting dynamics where
sometimes people just wish they were a
different sexuality than they were for
other reasons. And then there's other
things in the in the scale that ask
about your lifestyle. So, for example,
if you are in going to parties, queer
parties, if you have queer friends, then
you might have a homosexual lifestyle
even if you're straight.
But then again, it's
how would how much lifestyle would you
like? And so, for me, that was a real
moment where I was looking at that
going, "Wow, my lifestyle's really
straight." Um, and maybe I need to
change this. And so, he was using these
attractions and fantasies and identities
and the past, present, ideal to help
people to think through all these
complicated feelings we have around our
sexuality and to identify problem like
sticking points. Yeah, that's
fascinating. So, maybe the the
presumption there is if everything is
aligned,
the fantasies, the ideal partner, the
all of those things, that's probably the
healthiest place to be. Right. And so,
he would look at especially the ideal
and the the present. And if those were
different. So, if you said, "I wish I
was bi, but I'm straight." Or I I'm bi,
but I wish I was straight. Um, or I'm
homosexual and I wish I was straight. He
would say, "Let's talk about that."
And he'd try to work through it. And the
term he used for bisexual people who
were uncomfortable in their own
sexuality was being a troubled bisexual.
And so, I think you can I think any
sexuality can be troubled. I think you
could could be a troubled straight
person, a troubled homosexual person, a
troubled asexual person. Um, and just
thinking about why and which aspect you
may be missing I think is really healthy
for people to do. Meaning there's some
puzzles that you haven't quite figured
out, maybe you haven't been honest with
yourself about your preferences, all
that kind of stuff. I don't really like
talking about honesty with yourself. I
think that's a that's a high bar. And I
think it's also often weaponized against
people, especially by men, where there's
this idea if you're not really being
honest, you're actually gay. And so, I
think this idea of we're not being
honest with your own sexuality, that's a
that's a big word. I think it's more
that maybe you haven't had the right
framework or the right words to think
about aspects of your sexuality that are
troubling to you. How obvious when a
person's bisexual, how obvious is it to
identify like the sexual orientation
grid? Like
how big is the sign, whatever you are? I
think the sign is smaller than we think
it is. I think that there are
there's this tendency to assume that
sexuality is something that we find and
keep and consolidate from our teenage
years, maybe early twenties. You maybe
get university thrown in. So, that if
you get your experimental years in
undergrad, but then it you kind of have
to choose.
And
that is a difficult requirement I think
for a lot of people because you can't
possibly know all of the things and all
the people you might be interested in at
that point. And we change in every other
way, why wouldn't we change in this way?
So, I think giving ourselves also the
ability to reappraise where we're at
with our own sexuality, our own desires,
our own relationship status, all these
things is important to keep us happy and
healthy and to not run into issues that
we know are faced by a lot of
homosexual, but also bisexual people.
Like research has found that bisexual
people are more likely to self-harm,
they're more likely to be the victims of
sexual violence, more likely to be
isolated, more likely to um, be stalked.
There's lots of different aspects of
being bi that are negative and the
reason for that is mostly because bi
people are at least likely to be plugged
into the community.
So, when you're going through stuff like
this and you feel different and you're
constantly being asked about your
sexuality if you're open about it, or
you're hiding it, that's also troubling.
Um, you're going to have these negative
consequences, especially if you don't
feel like the queer community is really
a place for you. So, that's where also
finding your people really matters.
Since we're on the topic of sexuality,
one of the things you touched on in your
book on evil was uh,
kinks, sexual fantasies. I think the
point of describing that was that we
often label that as evil or bad.
What can you say about what you've
learned from kinks and sexual fantasies
from uh, writing that book? So, the
reason I included kinks in evil and
sexual conversations in general is
because it is so often thrown into the
same conversation. So, if someone comes
to me and says, "Julia, I want you to
um,
help me explain why this person killed
this other person." And they'll often
say,
"Did you know that he or she was also
into insert kink here." Or insert
non-traditional relationship structure
here. Or insert whatever. And
I respond to that by going, "Okay, so?"
And I think people use these words like,
"Ooh, he was really into BDSM." And
think that that's going to have this
really important impact on me. Or, "Ooh,
they were swingers." And so, and again,
I go,
"Yeah, that that's you know, almost like
and in other news, they were swingers."
It's like that is not related to this
crime at all unless, you know, one of
the partners was killed. Um, but people
see this as a defect of character. And
kink is very much seen as a defect of
character in many circles, especially in
sort of broader society. And that is
wild to me because if you look at
research on sexual fantasies and kinks,
a lot of people have at least one. So, a
lot of people, BDSM being the the most
common, um, are engaging in or
interested in BDSM. So, things like uh,
choking or things like restraints or
being degraded or doing the degrading of
other people in bed, consensually, of
course. That is something that a lot of
people fantasize about and a lot of
people engage in. And so, these
kinks and these fetishes, they are much
more commonplace than we sometimes think
about them as. Now, on the other hand,
we obviously need to be careful not to
assume that because in pornography BDSM
is almost ubiquitous it feels, that that
means everybody wants this. That is
absolutely not the case, but we also
don't want to marginalize it and say
it's almost nobody. It's it's somewhere
in between. And the main thing is always
just to ask and to have open
conversations about what it is that
people actually want in bed and to make
sure you have things like safe words.
So,
you know, putting in the restraints to
make sure that these interactions are
safe and consensual.
And then being able to explore. And I
mean, there's everything from you know,
pup play where you dress up as a puppy
and you engage in either just general
frolicking or sexual behavior to other
things like blood play, which is when
you pierce the skin to release some sort
of blood. That can be scratching, that
can be cutting, that can be of yourself
or your partner. That can be this
idea of, you know,
I don't know, it's this taboo thing
you're doing together and it's sexy in
its own way. And so, everybody has their
own versions of what they find
attractive. And rubbing up against
people, you know, sort of unsuspecting,
pretending that someone's sleeping.
There's there's this wide range of
things and I think people also feel
often deeply ashamed about the things
that they are interested in.
And I think that is also really sad
because it makes it more likely that
people are going to not be able to live
that part of themselves and also that
they think there's something wrong with
them. And that can spiral into things
like, "Am I evil? Am I bad? Am I a bad
person because I have these fantasies?"
And that ties in unfortunately with
homosexuality and bisexuality. And the
way that certainly and in most parts of
the world still today, these queer lives
and queer identities are still
villainized. They're still seen as
lesser, as bad, as a sign of a defect of
character. And if people see that within
themselves, they're going to think
differently about themselves and we
well, society is going to treat them
differently. So, it's all about
destigmatizing. I really liked what you
wrote about, I guess it was in the
context of BDSM or maybe sadomasochism
or maybe just the submissive dominant
dynamic. Like why that might be
appealing, the disinhibition hypothesis.
I guess this applies generally to sexual
fantasies. Is if you live them out, that
you could just let go of all the
that we that we put up in
normal society. That you could just be
all in, fully present to the pleasure of
it. Right. And that's what research has
found on fetishes, especially on BDSM,
is that the reason that people say they
like it. I mean, it's hard to explain
why you have a fantasy. But if you go
into the finer questions and really dig
deep, you can find that people
will explain a version of "Well, I can
really let go. And I don't have to if
someone is telling me what to do, then I
don't have to make any decisions. And
I've spent all day making millions of
decisions and I don't have to in this
context. And I really like that because
it's freeing." And so, that's that
disinhibition hypothesis, is that the
reason that we often go to things in the
bedroom that in other contexts we don't
like or even find repulsive. Like I
don't in normal life potentially want to
be told what to do. But maybe when you
move into the bedroom, you go, "Yeah,
but this is a different context." And I
kind of want the reverse of what I want
in my day-to-day life. And so, I can
also understand like furries and that
sort of completely living as another
species of it even is it's a really
interesting psychological phenomenon
that of release and of letting go of
social pressure. But I think that also
applies to cuz you mentioned submissive
that's more
straightforward to understand. I think
that also applies to dominant
cuz like
yeah, you don't have to
walk on eggshells. It's the clarity of
it. That was really interesting like
what having read that from you that
really made me think that there is a
deep truth to that.
To like being true to whatever the
sexual fantasy is.
Like it's not just the fantasy itself
that's appealing.
It's the being free in some sense. It's
the being free and the juxtaposition
there is that you are free because of
the fiction.
Like you're play-acting.
But it's touching at something deep
inside you psychologically.
And so that's where it sort of feels
weird but it also makes sense. I mean
this is also why we like fiction because
it allows you to maybe be somebody else,
have someone else's thoughts in your
mind for a while and you really get to
live it as that for a bit. So I think
yeah, the truth and fiction
sort of circle is always an interesting
one.
So you've you know, for researching the
the bi book the the bisexuality book,
what have you learned about sexuality in
general? Human nature kind of sexuality
and how it's practiced in terms of
different communities and I'm sure
there's like subcultures and stuff.
Yeah, what have you learned?
So the research on human sexuality I
think is interesting because we keep
finding that people have these desires
that they feel weird about that they
unless they have a community or an app
that's you can go to to
live those fantasies, they can feel
quite troubling to the individual and
they can make you unwell. And that's
true whether it's about your sexuality
so being gay and being unable to live as
a gay person or if that's wanting to
engage in BDSM and not having an outlet
for that. So that can just make you
unhappy. So I think that the the stigma
there is that that unhappiness is going
to lead to some sort of horrible
manifestations of crime. I think that is
mostly nonsense but it's more that I'm
concerned about the mental health
consequences for the individual who's
unable to explore those sides of
themselves. And in research on
kinks and sexuality, it's just about
also making sure that we have visible
representation of certain kinds of
communities and so that's one of the
reasons I ended up writing bi. I came
out in making evil making evil's the UK
title evil in the US. Um I came out
because I was writing about all the
things we associate with the word evil
and homosexuality certainly is one of
those things. You came out as bisexual
by the way, yeah. Yeah, I came out as
bisexual um and I came out as bisexual
in the book and I did it specifically
and I wrote it this way as well because
I was talking about the importance of
visibility and how it's through
visibility that you realize that the
people around you, people you already
know and love
are part of this community that
otherwise feels other, it feels foreign,
it feels abstract and maybe feels scary.
But if you realize that actually you've
got gay friends or you've got friends
who are into certain kinds of fetishes
or you've got friends who are whatever
sexuality sort of aspect you're talking
about
you suddenly go, oh
it's going to be much harder to
dehumanize people these people and and
this is where all of this kind of comes
for me from a really sad place. There's
a
you could talk about bi as this project
of love and how I was finding the
community. I was trying to write
something that would sort of bring us
all together
but it's also because I'm constantly
terrified that my rights are going to be
stripped back.
And we know that the
laws around homosexual behavior and
the rights around
bisexual people as well
um they're in flux. There's no straight
line of acceptance and just because
right now I happen to live in a time and
place where I'm allowed to be openly
bisexual and I can engage in homosexual
activity, it doesn't mean that that's
going to stay. Not even necessarily in
my lifetime. And so I think much like
writing evil at a time when you're not
at war and you're able to think really
you know, deeply about these important
issues, I think we also need to be
thinking about things like sexuality and
other issues that are important to us
and if we want to preserve our rights,
we need to normalize these issues and
make sure that they're visible so that
people find it harder to dehumanize
those communities. And so I'm always
terrified that bisexual people are going
to be hypersexualized dehumanized again
and that there's going to be laws
against
basically just who I am. Did you hear
from a bunch of people after making evil
after evil, the book I'm mentioning and
coming out in that book and then writing
uh the bi book that that are bisexual
and maybe what are some stories? I'm
sure
cuz I haven't seen much material on it
as you spoke to. So I'm sure they felt
lonely without a community, right? Yeah,
a lot of people felt seen by the book.
So it was really beautiful the the fan
mail I got when the sort of responses to
the book. And I got them from all over
the world and so in the book I also
spoke with some researchers who were in
stationed or doing research in countries
where bisexual behavior specifically is
illegal or homosexual behavior was
illegal. Um for a long time bisexuality
was especially in women um
well actually homosexuality in women in
general was sort of seen as
it was it was a blind spot cuz what
counted as sex is sex with a penis and
so women can't have sex with one
another. And so a lot of laws around
homosexuality are specifically applying
to men.
And certainly historically that's the
case. So we're talking about like sodomy
and that involves men and not women. And
so if you
look at the evolution of laws, for a
while women were kind of
like it was socially not necessarily
acceptable but they were kind of getting
away with it legally. But then
more recently especially
as bisexuality gets more visible as
well, certain countries have started
writing it specifically into their
constitutions and specifically into
their laws
um that bisexual identities and papers
are also seen as problematic and
illegal. So again, these laws change all
the time but in terms of fan mail um
especially from people in countries
where homosexuality and bisexuality are
illegal or are seen as problematic, are
socially condemned
that was particularly important. So that
those people were particularly writing
saying some of them also saying, can I
translate this into this other language
on the DL like on the down low and just
like distribute this to my friends. I I
had people sending me messages saying
I'm at X airport or in X country where
this is this would be considered
contraband like this book. My book is a
banned book, fun fact. Nice. It's it was
banned. I I sold the rights to a foreign
publisher and right after it was sold
the laws changed and they sent me this
really sad email saying unfortunately we
can't publish your book because it now
it's now considered part of the like gay
agenda sort of
promoting gay gay and homosexual
lifestyles um and so we can't publish it
anymore. But it does I take like a
little bit of pride in the fact that
it's a banned book.
But I find it really sad obviously as to
what it means but also makes me feel
like it's more important. And that's
what people were writing to me about.
What advice would you give to young
people
or just people in general that are
trying to figure out
their sexuality
or how to speak about their sexuality?
I'd say try and read widely on issues
around sexuality um books like mine but
also other books might help you to
navigate whether or not um
your
you know, what labels there are and also
whether or not those labels are good for
you. I think things like the Klein grid
are really helpful especially for people
who are more analytically minded like
you and I. Um I think it gives you a
construct to work with and numbers to
work with and that can be really helpful
to try and go almost seeing your
sexuality as a mathematical equation.
And I think that can be quite useful and
if that's how you think then look at the
Klein grid and see if that helps you to
navigate things. Uh bit of a tricky
question but what are the pros and cons
of coming out publicly
as a non-standard sexuality? Hm. Was
that from a recommendation perspective?
What are some benefits and
what are some challenges?
So the benefits are that you can
well, live authentically. You can just
be yourself. So I I do feel more free in
who I am and who I'm able to sort of be
online for example now that I'm out. And
cuz I came out after in my 30s, I think
also
it was almost a foot in the door
technique as well which is a
psychological technique of first coming
in and then coming with your big ask.
And so I'd already published two books.
Yeah. I was already an established
scientist. I think if I tried bi first,
I A wouldn't have been able to publish
the book. It was the first mainstream
book on bisexuality ever.
Um and B
I I don't think I would have been taken
seriously as a scientist. And so having
the other stuff first and then bi was
sort of a
side project that was acceptable but I
think the other way around wouldn't have
I I think it was still brave. I think
uh I think you mentioned somewhere maybe
in an interview that there was some
concern of being sexualized when you
covered the topic of sexuality. There
still is.
And but I actually find that it's it's
done the opposite most of the time.
So I think as a woman
especially a young woman who's in the
public eye you're sexualized anyway
unfortunately. And so that is and was
already a huge part of my online
experience. And actually I think coming
out as bi A you get sort of allies who
suddenly are like, we're on your side,
we're going to help you fight sort of
the hypersexualization and people get
more
almost more weird about in a good way.
They get a bit quiet about it cuz
they're like, oh well now it's an
identity thing.
So maybe I shouldn't comment on what
she's wearing and it sort of it almost
disarmed some of the more sexualized
comments. So for me I have to say it was
mostly a positive experience. The incels
didn't know what to do with it.
>> Exactly. Like ah
Uh just to go back to the beginning
maybe uh what got you interested in
criminal psychology? Well, you if you
look at my trajectory into academia and
then through it.
Basically what happened is I was ready
to go study art.
That's what happened. I had my portfolio
ready to go. I was going to go study art
at undergrad and then my grandfather
intervened and was like
being an artist is a really hard life.
Maybe you should reconsider. What kind
of art? Sorry to take that tangent. Uh
painting.
That is fast. I would not have expected
that cuz you're so super analytical.
Yeah, I am but I also I really like
surrealism and I really like messing
with sense of reality which again is
obviously something that then will find
its way into my academic work. Um but he
was also right. I mean I I've always
been very
intellectual let's just say. I skipped a
couple of grades in school. I was part
of the chess club. Like it was very much
I was
the clever kid. Um and so
but there's also part of me that's just
like but art is beautiful. I love making
art and it can speak to so many people.
Anyway, my grandfather convinced me not
to do it and then I applied instead for
psychology.
Um although at that point you just had
to say social sciences. You didn't have
to yet
specify but I knew it was probably going
to be psychology. And the reason for
that
was because my dad has paranoid
schizophrenia.
And so I think one of the reasons I'm so
obsessed with this idea of what is real
and
and that is in every way that that I
mean that in terms of what is real in
terms of perceptions of right and wrong.
What is real in terms of our own
memories of the world? What is real in
terms of what happened in a crime? What
is real in terms of perceptual abilities
and neuroscience? What is real? I mean I
mean that on in every way.
And I think that's because I grew up
with someone who had
a unique view of what is real in real
time.
And so seeing that I think
just affected me profoundly because not
only was it very destabilizing in terms
of my upbringing but also it's just in
your face that people
quite literally are seeing and hearing
different things than you.
And to not jump from that to what else
are people perceiving differently than
me I think would be almost like a missed
opportunity.
And so I went to study psychology partly
to understand that and what was going on
there and then that took me down the
sort of reality hole and
honestly the reason I went to criminal
psychology cuz I could have gone into
any other. The criminal psychologists
were the most they were the most fun.
I feel like lots of psychologists they
took themselves so seriously.
And I just I could I couldn't. I was
like I don't this isn't the vibe.
And so the criminal psychologists were
they had this gallows humor. They were
doing these like arguably the most
serious of the the crimes and the and
the cases and yet were somehow
having fun and having nice lives and I
saw myself and I went well I want to do
this version and so I did. Yeah, that's
great to hear that criminal psychology
because probably they have to really
more than any any other subfield
confront the reality of the mind. And
it's often quite procedural. So I'm also
much more interested in applied sciences
because I like the idea of
you know, what do we do with this
information? And the thing that
interests me most from a research
perspective, I mean I did my PhD in
false memories so implanting false
memories of committing crime which was
the study that ended up going because
I was the first to to do it and I built
a history of people implanting false
memories of various kinds of other
emotional events but it was the first
time that someone had combined false
confessions research and false memory
research. And so that was the research
of Elizabeth Loftus and Saul Kassin. So
false confessions was Saul Kassin and
false memories was Elizabeth Loftus and
I was just doing them both at the same
time. And the question was could you get
people to believe that they committed a
crime that never happened and confess to
it? And not just that but believe that
it actually happened so remember it. And
the answer to that in short is yes, you
can especially using specific leading
and suggestive interview techniques. And
so the procedural learning from that
which is what I'm most interested in. I
don't like that's sort of a party trick
to be able to actually do it. And that's
just so that you can then take that and
go okay, well how do we prevent this?
And so I've since trained police,
lawyers. I've trained people at the ICC,
the International Criminal Court who
deal with collective memories so they
deal with hundreds of witnesses at a
time and war crimes. And the question is
how do we
try to preserve as original as possible
memory without contaminating it because
well, or at least without contaminating
any more than it already is. And that's
where social psychology I think excels
is that we have done lots of research on
how social settings change what people
say and to some extent what people
believe. And I think that's also where
actually the leap to things like AI I
think is not far because ultimately the
way that we're engaging with large
language models
is that and generative AI in general is
that it it's structured as a social
interaction. It's structured as a
conversation most of the time now.
And that is
what we do. I that is literally what I
trained the police on doing is how do I
make sure that you don't distort
people's memories in the process and how
to ask good questions. And so you get
confabulations from both sides now. You
get confabulations from AI and from the
people. And the problem is that there's
this third thing which is the in between
that I'm not sure is getting enough
attention right now. And I wish that
there was more integration of social
scientists like me and people who do
investigative interviewing and have done
it for decades
to understand what is happening in the
in between and so that we can both teach
the people and the AI to respond better
in that situation. I mean that's really
interesting. Are you saying that there's
a drift of some kind in terms of
on both AI and human side when they're
interacting together
that we need to be very clear about?
Yes.
There is
what we've created with gen AI is
basically the ultimate false memory
machine.
We have created a tailored experience of
something that is most of the time
telling you what it thinks you want to
hear.
And then it's uncritically giving that
to you or I mean sometimes of course
there's you know, other things where
it's sort of appraising whether or not
this is truthful or not but it is giving
that to you
and there's no safeguard from you just
going this is truth
and this is my past or this is how I
remembered it. And the problem is is
that not only are is AI potentially
distorting people and their memories and
never mind the factual basis on which
they're relying but it's also the other
way around is that potentially by asking
leading or problematic questions the
people are changing how the AI is
creating the content which is in turn on
some fundamental level potentially
having an impact on how it's discerning
truth from fiction.
And so that's where the false memory in
human minds and confabulations in AI I
think are
much more similar than we think. And
when I first saw AI
confabulate hallucinate I was like this
is what people do all the time.
It's just that we can't fact check them
all the time. We're not in a
conversation constantly being like well,
is that quite right?
I'm going to use that for my homework,
right? So
it's uh this is both juicy and really
troubling. Well, right now the
interactions are pretty ephemeral.
They're short-lasting
and there's not really a deep memory
to the interactions but this could get a
lot worse
if the AI is personalized to a degree
where it remembers things about you so
that it can then start to
over many interactions feed the
narrative
about your past that you construct
together with the AI
over time. But you don't even need that.
So this is what we find in investigative
interviewing which is police
interviewing of witnesses and suspects
is that all you need is a leading
question or a suggestive piece of
information. In a short interaction most
people most police officers don't spend
a long time and they don't have to know
memory of this person's past. They know
basically nothing about them except for
things related to the crime. And yet we
know that within that very short maybe
half hour one hour interaction people's
stories can change fundamentally and the
problem is that if you create if you
have a memory of something
that when you pull it up
in that social interaction it's it's
sort of live. It's like active. And when
you then finish that interaction it sets
back down.
And the thing is that if you put it back
in a different way what's going to
happen is the next time you're going to
remember the latest version and you
might not realize that it's shifted.
And so over time it can shift and you
don't realize it and that's your truth
and that's where
even just short interactions can have a
profound impact on the human mind. Wow.
Do you modify memories that quickly?
Yeah, we do all the time in experiments.
Okay, can you speak a little bit more to
false memory? So like that's just
fascinating. So things happen to us we
humans
do things in the world and then we
remember them and most of our lives I
guess is lived in memory
in remembering the things that happened
to us.
And you're saying
that we can modify
the story we tell about the things that
happened to us.
That's fascinating. So what do we know
about this
ability to have false memories?
We know that false memories are common
that they're a feature of a normal
healthy brain. They're not this glitch.
They are a feature.
And we know that false memories are
incredibly common in terms of if you
think about basically any memory. Now
I'm interested in autobiographical
memories. This isn't memories of facts.
This isn't memories of experiences
things that you've lived in some way.
And of those autobiographical memories
basically every single autobiographical
memory you have is false. The question
isn't whether it's false. The question
is how false.
You're just staring over there. Well, I
mean, yeah, this I mean, it's both
beautiful and terrifying that no nothing
is real. No, that's not that's not what
I'm saying. Okay. I'm just saying that
everything has a degree of falsehood to
it. And this is where sometimes I'll get
accused of being like, "Oh, but that
does that mean we can never use witness
statements?" That I'm not saying we
can't use any witness statements. I'm
just saying that we need to be careful
because even if people say things with
confidence, it doesn't necessarily mean
they're true. Or if they have
multi-sensory details. They're
describing in very specific detail what
they smelled, what they heard, what they
whatever. It doesn't mean it's
necessarily true. Most of the time our
autobiographical memories are good
enough. Mhm.
And that's where memory scientists talk
about this as gist memory. Our gist
memory for events, much like for text.
You get the gist of it, right? You
you're good enough. You generally
remember accurately approximately what
happened. But it's when you get to the
so-called verbatim details, the specific
details of memories, that you find
people are often really bad.
Now, most of the time that doesn't
really matter because you remember you
hung out with a friend, you remember you
were at this university, you remember
approximately what what your favorite
cafe was, you remember this important
negative or positive event. Fine. You
don't actually need to know exactly what
you were wearing and drinking and
saying.
But in a criminal justice setting
you do need to remember exactly what you
were drinking and saying and and and
doing, right? And so that's where we
have this need to break down this human
capacity for memory to this level of
detail that is just not made for.
So, that's where the verbatim stuff can
get you into trouble cuz with criminal
cases, I suppose the tiniest details
really matter cuz then the lawyers can
like really zoom in on that particular
detail and then you could just make that
up and then they
interrogation with a leading question,
as you were saying, can just alter your
memory of a particular detail and then
everything will hang on that detail.
Right. And if that particular detail is
someone's face, then that's a really big
problem. You're right.
>> And so
and and and it can also be an entire
false memory. And so this is where in my
research and in the research like mine,
we've implanted
it well, memories, what we call memories
or false memories, of experiences that
never happened at all. So, while most
things are modifications of real
memories false memories, complete false
memories, are when you think you
experienced something that you didn't.
And we all have them. We all have some
memories that can't be true. And we
usually realize them, for example, when
we talk to our parents about our
childhood or when we talk to friends and
we say, "Remember that time we did
this?" And your friend will go
"That happened to me. That didn't happen
to you."
>> Mhm. And you become what is known in
research as a memory thief, where you've
stolen somebody else's memory. And
you've accepted it or your brain has
accepted it as your own. And that's
possibly because the other person told
it in such vivid detail that you could
imagine it. And basically, your brain
was like "Well, this feels real now."
And so the next time you thought about
that, maybe maybe not the next time, but
maybe after a couple of times of
thinking about it, you started going
"This happened to me, right?"
And then you integrate it into your
autobiography.
How hard is it to insert false memories?
Not hard. Mhm. It's very easy to distort
memories or to insert small false
memories. It's harder to convince people
of entire events. Especially specific
events. And this is wildly debated
exactly how easy it is to implant a
specific false memory. Um it's also one
of the big debates around my own
research is that when I was writing The
Memory Illusion, which was my first book
and the research that was in line with
that, there was a huge debate between me
and a couple of other academics about
what it means for something to be a
false memory and how we should talk
about the ease with which they're
implanted. And that is still one of the
biggest scientific debates in our field.
And to me, I think that's So, the the
the coding stuff is about the difference
between what some people call a false
belief and a false memory.
So, I think this thing happened or I
remember this thing happened.
And that is a really difficult
differentiation often. Because all we
have as social psychologists is what
you're telling me.
And I can ask you, do you think it
really happened or not? Do you believe
it really happened? But
it's really hard to differentiate. And
so I've always thought that you need to
ask people about the specifics like all
right, how confident are you in this
memory? Are do you feel things in this
memory? Does it feel like other kinds of
mem right? So, sort of the nate like
describe the nature of this experience
rather than being like, do you think
this is a real memory? Cuz that's that's
a hard thing to ask people to do.
So, you you you want to get indirectly
as many signals as possible to show that
they actually believe the thing
happened. Or that it approximates a
memory in their minds. That's right.
Rather than just a thing they think kind
of sort of happened. Yeah. But other
people think that it's an easier to
differentiate line. So, for me, that
differ that it's almost impossible to
differentiate the two. Other people
think it's more clear. Um
And then in terms of the frequency, so
in my research, 70% of people became
convinced that they committed a crime
that never happened or experienced
another important emotional event. And
that number as well is is challenged in
that people go, "Well, does that mean
that 70% of people can have false
memories like this?" And the answer is
no, obviously not. That's that's just in
my sample. That's just these specific
six false memories and it could be that
I think 100% of people are prone to some
version of this.
Just maybe not in this specific study.
Right? If I had to come up with
different false memories to implant or
if I was a different person myself and
people trusted me differently. There's
the again those social factors that make
it more or less likely that I'm going to
be able to convince you that something
happened in your life that you can't
remember. And in one study, obviously I
can't capture that. But it also doesn't
mean that 70% of the time people are you
know, it might be 1% of the time or 0.1%
of the time that people have these
complex false memories. I guess you're
just speaking to the fact that you know,
you don't know how representative the
sample is. But even for with one study,
that's a crazy
that's that's incredible. Well, it's not
just representativeness, it's also that
we shouldn't take individual studies in
that way. Sure. Like I'm not saying that
70% of people always have false memories
either. Like it's it just means in this
one study
more people than not develop these
complex memories. What was the
methodology for implanting the false
memories? This is so cool, by the way.
I just human memory is so fascinating.
And the fact that we can engineer
memory. It's good that we can
>> It's also really interesting that we
live so much of our lives in memories.
Mhm.
And that that you can mess with that,
you can
shape it. It's interesting.
It's mostly I think a good thing that we
can shape it.
>> so. I think the the fact that
memory can be false in the way that I do
it in my study is it's a result of the
fact that our minds are made to
creatively recombine information to
solve problems
in the present. And so even the fact
that we have this gist memory it's
because we're optimizing data
processing.
We're basically saying, "These are the
most important things from these events
and the other details are irrelevant.
Don't remember that. Gone." Um and now
I'm going to work with that to try and
solve what life comes up with. And the
ability to be creative and intelligent
relies on our ability to take memories
from the past and pieces of them and to
creatively recombine them.
And so that's what false memories are
except that that then
can look bad if you're trying to
remember something specific.
And so in my research, I used leading
and suggestive questions like close your
eyes. Uh picture the event that I'm
trying to implant. So, I was implanting,
for example
uh you're 14 years old, you were in
contact with the police, the police
called your parents and you assaulted
someone with a weapon. Um and then the
question is
what do you remember?
And you say to me as a participant,
because you've been selected out to
specifically never having had this
experience. And just to be clear, weapon
I don't mean a semi-automatic weapon, I
mean anything. Um and usually it was a
rock. And so people would say I cuz a
weapon is just anything you use to hurt
another person. And I did the study in
Canada, we don't have guns in the same
way as in some other parts of the world.
And so it was unlikely that my
participants would have been like,
"Yeah, I totally have all these guns."
Um and so they would take something, an
object, and hurt somebody else or they
stole something or they um hit somebody.
So, those were three of the conditions.
And I randomly assigned people to them.
And
they knew that I'd contacted um their
loved ones ahead of time.
So, they they they were participating in
a childhood memory study
an emotional childhood memory study. And
they knew that and then I'd contacted
their parents ahead of time to get
information about what they were like as
teenagers, where they lived, friends,
basic things. And to make sure they
hadn't ever experienced any of the
target events.
And then with that information, I said
to the participants, "Okay, so there's
these two things your parents reported
happening and one of them
is a true one." And so I'd always
include a true one to build rapport,
which is
I'm doing the what not to do of
interviewing, right? Right. I'm I'm
laying it on thick.
>> To see what's possible.
>> To see what's possible because you have
to to push it to also show that it's
create that I can do this in this
context so that we can warn police to
not do this.
So, I said we had these two instances
that your parents reported and one of
them was you had a skiing accident and
blah blah blah. Let's start with that
one. The second one was an instance
where you were in contact with the
police, but we'll get to that. So, we'd
first have 20 minutes about the true
memory. Which people you know, they're
they're getting going. It feels good.
I've got a structured interview as well,
which I'll then mirror in the false
memory. Um so, it all feels very legit.
And then we get to the second memory and
I say this, you know, I there's this
other important memory that your parents
recalled. And then they'd say, "I don't
remember that." And I'd say, "Oh, okay,
but I have this really detailed account.
All you have to do is remember it." And
then I would do the illusion of
transparency, which is a really powerful
psychological tool, which is to make
people feel like they know what's going
on when they don't really. And the thing
I would do is just say,
"Well, you know, if you want to, we can
do this memory retrieval technique
called this imagination exercise." And I
don't like to call it repression, but
sometimes we hide away memories that we
don't like about ourselves.
And I'm using words that people know and
mechanisms that people have heard of
that are frankly quite disputed in
actual science, but people go, "Oh,
well, maybe I did repress this." And
then everybody says, "Yes."
Like technically they could say no. They
could say no, I don't want to do that.
But they go, "Yeah, of course I want to
know."
And so I do this imagination exercise
where people close their eyes, very
simple, and just imagine how what could
have happened basically. And every time
they say a detail, my very first detail
ever, I remember this because I was so
excited cuz they've got their eyes
closed, right? And I'm right next to the
head of department because they were
worried cuz I was a PhD student that,
you know, the ethics of it, the
consequences. Like it took like years to
get the protocol through ethics and to
make sure it was safe. Anyway, I'm
I'm grinning as the person with their
eyes closed says the most trivial
detail,
"I remember a blue sky."
And I remember going,
"It's working." Did you know it was
going to happen at all?
>> Oh, no, I had no idea. That's so
fascinating.
>> And so from the trivial details, and I'd
always say, "Yeah, good job. Good job."
And then, you know, social
reinforcement, little little treat,
little treat. And they would remember
more more details. And then they get
more specific. And then they tell me who
it was they allegedly attacked or stole
from, where they were. And those details
had to come from them because I don't
know enough about their lives, right?
So, that's the other thing with false
memories, is it's basing it on lots of
real pieces of memories, real places,
real people, real feelings. They're just
woven together in a way that never
happened. And so, just three interviews
and you've got 70% of people confessing
to a crime that never happened. First of
all, great study. Great great job all
around. To what degree has this been
sort of elaborated on and proven further
since? This is super powerful idea,
whether it's 70% or any kind of percent.
What I wanted with the study is just to
show it's possible. That's That's really
the powerful thing that it's possible.
Right. And so it could have been two
people and I would have been happy.
Um the fact that it was so possible was
uh frankly quite surprising to
everybody.
Um and we did in fact cut the study
short because we told ethics that we're
only going to have like a 13% hit rate.
And we're like, "Oh, this is working
really well. We're going to stop." Um so
and and that was just because of, you
know, how power calculations or
whatever, science. Because science. Um
and since then there've been other
uh studies on implanting false memories.
There've been ones also using AI tools.
So, like whether or not we remember
uh or think we remember incidents
differently or better if they were
created with AI images of ourselves or
videos. So, there was a study that came
out, I think it was this year, um inclu-
by a team including Elizabeth Loftus,
which showed that if you turned photos
of yourself into videos
using AI, that you are more likely to
believe that those things happened in
the way that AI is telling you that they
did, even though AI has absolutely no
idea.
And that then you are more likely to
remember it with high confidence that it
happened in the way that this AI has
created it. And so we can see that
there's
lots of versions of this, whether it's
in, you know, interpersonal social
interactions or or interactions with
tech.
Um and there's a big replication that's
happening right now in at the University
of Maastricht of my study.
Or it's about to happen, hopefully,
actually, is where we're at. There's a
lot of questions I'm going to ask you.
Well, like one of them, doesn't this
mean that
at scale
you can have something like a government
use propaganda to mass gaslight a
population?
So, implant
false memories
u- using AI, using using whatever tools
they have. Yes, that is definitely
already happening.
That's terrifying. Is there any anything
you've learned about defending against
that?
Yeah. I guess knowing that first step is
just knowing that it's possible. That's
already a very powerful piece of
knowledge. That's right. So, the first
thing that's important is for people to
understand that they are capable of
creating these false memories and that
they're not this really unusual, hard to
generate thing, that they're actually a
normal memory process. And that insight
is why I wrote The Memory Illusion is
because I think people need to just
understand that their minds work like
this. And that they're really glitchy
when it comes to the accuracy of their
autobiographical memories. But again,
that that's probably ultimately a good
thing as well in terms of our overall
human experience.
But then, what happens if you do have an
important piece of information that's
important to not being distorted, right?
You are witness of a crime, for example,
and you now know that this is going to
be important. What do you do? And the
really simple answer is, don't trust
your brain. Just make sure you write it
down. Assume you're going to forget
everything.
Assume you're going to forget, no matter
how important, how emotional, how
intense, how much you say to yourself,
this is the a failure of prospective
memory, it's called. Um I will remember.
You won't. Just assume that you're not
going to remember. And the closer you
get to the time at which an event
happened, and we call this
contemporaneous evidence, the closer you
get in time, the more high quality that
memory is going to be. And I think
there's this myth sometimes that like if
you're drunk or if you're high or if
you're really emotional, that that's
somehow you should wait. You should sort
of like
go home, sleep it off, and then recall
your memory. That is not what the
current advice in memory research
actually says. It's
in the moment, as soon as possible,
write it down, record it outside your
brain. You can do it again when you wake
up, but then at least you have an
original version.
Yeah, you uh you used the analogy of a
Wikipedia page for memory. I think it's
pretty useful way to think about it.
It's kind of crowd-sourced
by all the different influences you
have,
all the different experiences, all the
other people, you telling other people
about the memory that interact all of
that edits the page, the Wikipedia page
of your memory.
It does, and collective and individual
memory are these really interesting they
they interact in really interesting
ways. So, I would always say it's when I
train, for example,
people who go to deal with warlords in
uh the German military. I was working
with um agents who are going abroad and
who are
in these really difficult situations
where they had to remember a lot of
information that was important for
national security. They couldn't just
sit there with the tape recorder being
like, "Hey." Or like their phone being
like, "Hey, Mr. Warlord, can you just
talk into this a bit closer?" You can't
do that. And so you have to remember it.
And so what they were doing is they were
coming back from their deployments and
they would meet up immediately and have
like a team meeting to be like, "What
did you remember? What happened?" And
the problem is that they would do that
before writing their notes.
And that is that is the wrong way
around. And so they don't do that
anymore because I've told them not to do
that anymore. But it feels good. It
feels like collectively we are going to
remember more details. Because you do,
but it doesn't mean that those details
are right.
And so that's where I'd always say,
"Have your own version before you talk
to anybody." Then, and my
uh colleague Dr. Annelies Freideveld is
one of the experts on the effect of
things like eye closure on memory and
collective memory. And she has found
repeatedly that if you remember things
together,
especially if you've already got an
original version of your own, you do
usually remember more details. And
especially if you are helping each other
to remember, like in a relationship,
you'll have someone who's better at
remembering certain kinds of details,
maybe names or
what happened or what you were doing.
And the other person's better at when it
happened. And so you can have these
complementary memories that come in in
social situations. And you can then have
more details that are remembered after.
Right, but there's conflicting forces
here. So, that's true, but also as you
said,
it's true that together you can weave a
narrative that never happened. So, you
together you can solidify the thing that
actually happened, maybe if you take
notes beforehand. But at the same time,
if you don't take notes, they can just
make up very effectively together
cuz you're like yes-anding the whole
time. Like building together a castle
that's false. Or distorted. Distorted.
Yeah. But you can also sometimes go back
to your original account and go,
"Actually, no, that that was a bit
wrong." And so it
my
as again an analytical person and
someone who works as an expert witness
on memory cases, I just want to see all
the versions.
I want your version history. I want the
complete version history of your memory.
And then I can tell you whether I think
things have gone wrong here and if so,
why. Have you seen like different
versions of memory
and they're really conflicting? Mhm.
Like what have you learned about memory
from that? That they could be very
conflicting. People explaining the same
experience in very different Well,
there's different people having very
different memories of the same
experience. And there's the same person
having different memories of the same
experience.
And so I work in both in some ways as an
expert witness, but mostly in the
individual changing their story in a
dramatic way. Uh yeah.
>> So, witness or
alleged victim saying that they,
you know, having X story the first time
they go to the police and then 3 years
later having a very different, some
categorically different account. And the
question is,
are they just Were they just too shy
initially to say what really happened?
Were they
Were they under pressure from other
people? Were they not really
remembering? You know, why has it
changed? Or could it be that they have
been undergone some really problematic
like hypnotherapy or just shady therapy
in general that is like convinced them
that things were maybe much worse than
they initially remembered. And it's not
that therapy doesn't neces- Like therapy
can bring out more details, for sure.
But the problem is that certain kinds of
therapy mirror what we do in false
memory research in terms of implanting
false memories, and it just makes it
really messy, and you just it it makes
the quality of the evidence really low
because we can no longer tell what is
because of the therapy and what's
actually remembered. This is so
fascinating. What are the ways you can
possibly figure out which is true, the
thing you remembered initially or the
thing you're now remembering 4 years
later? Receipts. That's all you got. You
have to look at your original versions.
If you only have your version now, the
only thing you can look for is evidence
that confirms or shows that it didn't
happen. If you can't access that, then
it ultimately is a matter of, especially
if you've got like two people saying
completely different things, it ends up
being a a battle of confidence,
ultimately. This is a tricky question,
but you mentioned therapy.
It does seem like what therapists do
is they want to find a problem, and they
can then just project a problem, and
then convince you the problem existed.
So, how do you know
is like therapy even an effective It it
takes a very special therapist not to
implant, right, a trauma that never
happened or or or um
details that never happened to a trauma
that did. It depends on the kind of
therapy. So, there's a lot of therapy
that is evidence-based, and that is very
much focused on tackling sort of
feelings and reactions that you have
right now.
Then there is a an area or a bunch of
areas of therapy, including
psychoanalysis, which
are very focused on trying to find
retroactively sources of mental illness
in your personal past. And I am very
critical of the kinds of Well, both from
an explanatory
perspective, but also from a false
memory perspective. I don't think that
we are the way we are because of
individual instance that happened to us.
I think that is a wild thing to think
about the brain.
Like to be like you are the way you are
because of this one interaction you had
that one time. It's like I mean, maybe
this explains a tiny bit of you, but
what about all the other life
experiences you have every single day?
Um and so, I think that there's
sometimes an oversimplified searching
for answers or sources of problems that
we have that I I don't like. I don't
think it's true. Um and I think that
there can be an uncautious approach to
memory, as you were saying, where you
have someone who is
saying things, and your role as a
therapist is to help them manage their
emotions now and to feel better. And
that's the other thing is that they have
very different role than I do. The
therapist is trying to manage the
person's well-being now. Mhm. Whereas
I'm looking at the evidentiary quality.
That is a complete I'm almost like the
not quite the other side, but I'm in a
very different role.
>> You well, you just want the truth. Well,
I'm criticizing  analyzing their
memories, whereas the others, the
therapists, are more likely to be trying
to help them manage the memories in
their day-to-day life.
So, it doesn't matter if they're true or
not to therapists. What matters is that
they're troubling to the people
themselves. But once you get into a
courtroom setting, as you say, the facts
and what actually happened matter. And
it's not just what you remember, it's
what actually happened.
Maybe you can speak to the other the
non-courtroom setting cuz this is all
The positive side of it is you can
basically shape your memories to be
happier.
I mean, I find this in myself, maybe you
could speak to that. If I, you know,
look at a past relationships, if I just
think about or maybe speak to others
about the positive things,
really think just think like
I focus my mind on the memory on the
positive memories, and then everything
just becomes more positive.
And I think
it makes me feel like I'm way happier
about my past.
So, there there must be something to
that cuz I I almost start to forget that
the negative stuff happened. And then
the same thing on the flip side is if
you focus on the negative, then the then
the negative stuff
just overpowers everything else, and you
have a very heavy negative feeling about
your past.
So, that seems
uh like the way to live a a healthy
life,
a happy life, is just to focus on the
positive. Not to sound cliché, but like
like basically modifying your mem-
memories continuously that everything
was just great.
Is there something to that? Well, the
essence of that is right. There is
something called state-dependent memory,
which is that you're more likely to
remember things that were consolidated
or created as memories
if the if they match the state that
you're in now. So, if you are sad now,
and you
your brain sort of just going, you're
more likely to remember other sad times
because your memory and the emotional
state of your brain is basically already
activating those networks of sadness,
and it's like, here's some other sad
things and shitty things that happened
to you. And it's the same with if you're
embarrassed. It's that's the sort of
classic one that we usually use as
memory researchers. It's that moment
where you do something embarrassing, and
for the next like 6 hours, all you're
thinking of is all the other
embarrassing things you've ever done.
And it's like your brain is like, would
you like some other embarrassing
stories?
And obviously, you're going, no, thank
you. Um please stop. But you have this
this spreading activation, as it's
called, of just the synapses just like
lighting up new networks, and you're
going, ah, and there's this other memory
that's attached to the same feeling. And
so, it's the same with happiness. Is
that people who are happier tend to
remember more happy memories. And so,
most of the time, unless you're
depressed, most people look back at
their lives with a sort of rosy
reminiscence bias, and they're more
likely to remember the positives than
the negatives. But it's not quite the
way you were describing it, actually.
So, it's not quite that you only
remember the good the objectively good
things that happened. It's more that
your interpretation of the things that
you've experienced is either neutral or
positive.
So, for me, for example, growing up with
my father with paranoid schizophrenia,
that is something that I see as a net
positive.
So, obviously, at the time it was
experienced in uh complicated way, but
in hindsight, it defined my life, and it
completely gave me a perspective of the
human mind that I just wouldn't have had
otherwise. And so, I see that as a
positive part of my autobiography. And
that is what good therapy should be
doing is it should be taking negative
experiences and not overwriting them or
changing them. I mean, our brains do
that naturally anyway. But trying to
work with what you've got, the
experiences, the true experiences, but
then just shifting the emotional content
so that how you're dealing with them now
is is good.
How much of uh
do what this is uh Danny Kahneman type
of idea that we live
a lot of our life in memory?
Like it's not, you know, the ex- there's
the ex- the direct in-the-moment
experience of a thing, and then there's
remembering that thing over and over and
over and over.
So, there's like, I don't know, getting
married or whatever, like some pleasant
thing
that if you over a lifetime, the
pleasure you derive from that thing is
disproportionately most of it is from
remembering the thing versus
experiencing it. Is there Is there
something to that? I think so. And his
experiments where he asked participants
if they were offered this holiday that
they could go on,
>> Mhm. but they wouldn't remember it. So,
they'd have the present-day experience
of enjoyment in this on this holiday. I
think it was a tropical vacation or
something that he'd offer people. And he
he then said, well, but you're not going
to be able to remember this. Would you
still go? And a lot of people say, no, I
I wouldn't go on that holiday if I can't
remember it. Um I think that's
interesting, and I think that
sort of picture or didn't happen. So,
the social media generation, obviously,
is
perhaps even more in line with that also
in terms of how you deal with that in
social contexts, sort of sharing those
memories with others and those
experiences, and which experiences end
up being the important ones in our
lives.
>> Yeah, there there's a real case to be
made, you know, there's this kind of
ridiculous thing that
Whenever something cool is happening,
people take out their phones and film
it. But the case for that is that, yeah,
this gives you actual something to look
back at. That it's worthwhile to take a
picture, actually.
Although, it's even more worthwhile to
pay attention. So, attention is the glue
between reality and memory. And so, if
you're using your phone to not have to
pay attention and not have to put any
work into remembering it, then you're
going to look at that picture later and
go, what was this?
Cuz you've tried to outsource it in a
way that our brains don't work. How hard
is it to modify memories from a
neuroscience perspective? So, if you
look at brain-computer interfaces like
Neuralink, for example, do you think
there's a future where we're implanting
or modifying memories
directly? Yeah. I mean, that's basically
what we do as human beings already, and
I don't see why tech couldn't do exactly
the same thing.
>> speed that up. So, right now we can do
that with language, right? We just talk
to each other and modify them, and we
just speed that up.
>> Language, but also think about it
yourself. So, you can
It's called auto-suggestion when you
suggest things to yourself that didn't
happen. Um and that often comes from
reading something or seeing something or
thinking about something or hearing
somebody else's story and going, did
something like that happen to me?
And then you start picturing it and
thinking about it in what context it
could have, and then you start to
basically implant a false memory in
yourself. And so, that can happen as
well. And I think with things like
Neuralink, it would be the same where
you'd have the ability to do that. And
But again, I I I still think that this
interaction between humans and AI or
AI-like systems is it is the same as a
social interaction, which is why I was
saying it's so important, I think, that
we have social psychologists in the in
the room because ultimately, whether
it's an AI or another person, it's the
same brain that you're modifying. So,
what you're worried about there is that
you become untethered from reality, like
you fabricate
too many details about the memory. Like
if you're if human is interacting with
AI and AI is telling the human what they
want to hear,
you're Are you worried about over time
you start to just have a very
uh overly modified version of your
of your past narrative?
I'm not necessarily worried about
the fact that
AI and generative AI can create false
memories.
That is again something we've also been
doing for a long time. Like modified
photos is something pre-AI that we had
that was already messing with people's
minds. Even just what you have in the
frame of a shot. So if you take a
holiday snap and you've you're omitting
like a really important part of what
actually happened on that holiday cuz
you're taking a picture of the nicest
part and not that you know, the garbage
behind you. Yeah. Um that is going to
have an impact on your memory as well.
So we've that versions of that have
always existed. And historically, if you
go even further back,
I mean in some ways we've never been
closer to facts than we are now. There's
this whole idea of like, "Oh, we're
living in this post-truth or blah blah
blah." Um but that is not true. I mean
we didn't even know how to write for a
long time. We had no way of reliably
cataloging information, never mind the
scientific method, never mind uh
reliably sharing it with one another or
fact-checking quickly with things like
Google. So I mean we're so close to
facts, but that in some ways I think is
the
the worry is that we've gotten
comfortable feeling like we can just
access things that aren't modified or
that are less likely to be modified and
now they're more likely to be, and that
can
interface with our memories. So just uh
practical, is there like a protocol for
self-modifying memories so you can live
a happier life? There is, yeah.
It's called cognitive restructuring.
When you actively deliberately change an
aspect of a memory, usually for some
therapeutic outcome so to be happier, to
be better in some way. That's really
interesting, right? Like not just for if
you have some kind of issue, but just
how to have a life well lived. Mhm.
Right? Yeah. Does that work? Yeah, it
totally works. I mean I do it all the
time. It's again it's about thinking
about experiences you've had, positive
or negative. Usually the negative are
the ones we need to work on more. Uh and
thinking instead of wow, how terrible
was that, thinking what did I learn from
that? What has this given me that other
people haven't experienced? What is it
that it taught me about who are my
friends? What did you know, what are
these insights that I've won from this
experience? And so I think that is an
important part of resilience that we
ideally need to celebrate and teach more
than
>> Yeah. the opposite, which is hanging in
the negatives. That's probably really
good for relationships, too, right?
Together you the you form the collective
memory.
And you work on that. You can just
fabricate or modify
towards the positive. Well, with
relationships, one of my favorite
research on memories is that if you ask
people in relationships who does most of
the housework or who does most of
certain things,
the numbers that they give you, so like
someone will say, "I do 60%." The other
person will say, "I do 50%." And you add
them up, that's more than 100%.
And that's basically always the case and
on lots of different fronts, people will
claim that they do more. And if you ask
them how much their partner does, they
will diminish it. And so one of the tips
I always say for relationships in terms
of memories is actually just sharing
what you're actually doing.
And so if you've
initially it feels a bit cumbersome
because it's quite unnatural to be like,
"I've just taken out, you know, the the
rubbish. I've just taken it out the
bins." Um or I've just booked us a
hotel. Um but saying it out loud means
the other person's able to perceive it
and then can add it to sort of their
internal
like star chart of how much you've done
in the relationship and they're more
likely to actually perceive what you're
contributing.
Whereas we just assume that people have
the same memories we do and that they
they of course she remembers that I took
out the bins.
But not necessarily, she might not even
have really perceived it. But if you're
reminding each other of all the things
that you're doing, it can feel more
balanced over time. So memories are just
so fascinating.
Uh is it possible This is a little bit
outside of the topic of false memories,
but is it possible to train memory? Like
what
What have you understood about memory?
Like can it be improved? Yep. It can be
improved and there are now some really
good brain training apps as well that
can help to get people to work better
with attention, to have N-back tests, so
remember information a couple of
information pieces of information back.
So what did I tell you three sentences
ago?
Um there's all of these kinds of
well, games effectively that you can
play that will in fact train how your
brain is using its networks. There was
one that was developed by researchers
including researchers at the University
of Bonn in Germany and it's called
NeuroNation.
And that's one that I like because it's
all these really short games and the
idea is that
doing one thing like Sudoku or whatever,
the sort of classics to train your
brain, that is only going to be useful
up to a point because it's then the same
thing over and over again. And what you
want to be doing is lots of different
kinds of tasks so that your brain has to
remain flexible.
And so short and many is the answer
rather than one thing hard.
It's almost the opposite of expertise.
Huh.
So in doing this regularly, like
keeping your mind sharp.
That's interesting.
Uh
I'm terrible at remembering names.
Me, too. Is there a trick to doing that?
I don't know cuz I I am also terrible at
remembering names. Allegedly there are
tricks and it's mostly to make the
information more sticky by making it a
bigger network in the brain. And so
usually when you hear a name, Mhm.
especially like you and I, it's like
gone immediately. Yeah. And that's
partly because I'd like to think the
positive of that is because we're
focusing on other things about the
person. Right. Like
>> Yes. what are they like? What are they
you know, what's this next interaction
going to be? Maybe you're a bit nervous
about what they're going to say or what
you're going to say. You're already
thinking a step ahead in terms of
interpreting the situation. And it's
quite an overwhelming situation when you
first meet somebody cuz there's a lot to
take in.
And so
if however, a name is important, then
you need to A,
remember to focus when they actually say
their name and tune out the other stuff,
which can be really difficult. And then
to give yourself a mnemonic of how do I
remember this name?
Um so you could have
visualize something, you could have a
weird like word game or some sort of
like rhyme that you create for the
person. You can say, you know,
uh Julia with big ears. Like whatever
works for you as long as it sticks. Now,
there's a caveat that I recently
discovered about myself and to in terms
of why I might not have I have
particularly bad memory for names. Um
all of these mnemonic devices that have
been studied over the last hundreds of
years
mostly rely on creating elaborate
pictures in your mind. So like memory
champions, people who do competitive
remembering will tell you that they
create these really elaborate images in
their heads.
I recently discovered that I have
aphantasia.
Mhm. Aphantasia is the inability to
create mental imagery.
And so when I was trying these
techniques, I was going, "None of these
are working for me."
And it turns out it's because I don't
see anything, whereas other people
actually see pictures in their mind.
And so I think there's some individual
differences stuff going on there that we
haven't quite understood. So you're not
able to visualize Like can you imagine
like a castle in your head and look at
it? No, so the memory palace idea is
absurd to me. Wow. But the So the test
for aphantasia is really easy, which is
close your eyes and picture a red apple.
You can't picture a red apple? And I
just see black.
Wow. Yeah. And there's a scale, so some
people are hyperphantasia
phantasic where they can have a really
elaborate version of the apple.
And other people have like a gray sort
of outline and I have nothing. Wait, how
does your memory work? Like if you think
about a past event, are you
Wait, am I visualizing the past event or
am I just Oh, that's the question. Or is
it just a concept?
>> I think it might be I might be operating
in the space of concepts. Mhm. Cuz I do.
And I think that's why I'm so interested
in concepts and ideas. Yeah. And we know
that people with aphantasia are less
likely to care about their childhood
memories cuz they can't visualize them.
I'm trying to think if I can visualize
people's faces from the past.
I I have a feeling like I can. Ooh, but
are you seeing anything?
>> I actually seeing it? I don't know. I
think I I actually reduced those people
down to a few concepts about the
characteristics of their face and I
might be
visualizing the concepts.
Boy. Interesting, right? Yeah.
>> with aphantasia don't realize they have
it until they have this kind of
conversation. I didn't know. I don't
know if I can visualize the red apple
now.
Oh, boy.
Yeah. Yeah, cuz I the memory palace
thing has never really worked for me
either. I tried. Interesting. Okay. I
have a hypothesis that people who are
analytical are more likely to I think it
intersects with other things.
Uh cuz a lot of my friends turns out
have aphantasia and I think it's there's
a version of intelligence I think that
it might be related to
or an interest in certain kinds of
concepts that it's related to.
Um but I don't know cuz it's early days
of research on this. All right, this
conversation totally is leading me to do
some soul-searching on many fronts.
You have done incredible work across a
number of discipline. I mean from from
sexuality to evil to memory
and now in your upcoming book, Green
Crime: Inside the Minds of the People
Destroying the Planet and How to Stop
Them. Can you speak to the psychology of
the people, the organizations that are
killing Earth as you describe, including
illegal gold miners, animal traffickers,
con men who falsify data and bribe
regulators to keep polluting
and uh many other types of criminals.
Is their psychology similar to the
psychology of some of the folks we've
been talking about? So, the book Green
Crime is really an experiment for me in
whether we can apply criminological and
criminal psychology ideas to the area of
environmental protection and and crimes
because there are people who are
convicted of crimes who are convicted of
crimes specifically in relation to
destroying the earth and our natural
resources, our shared resources. I
sometimes think about the earth as like
a house
and if someone was coming into your
house and just setting things on fire
and then walking out unpunished, you'd
be really upset and correctly so or
poisoning your water or just like
leaving a bunch of garbage all over your
house. And that's what people are doing
on a planetary scale and the question is
are we responding effectively and if so,
who who is responding effectively? And
then what is the adequate punishment?
How should we deal with the people who
we who we catch? And so
in this book, the question was are the
people who are
for example, I used the the Dieselgate
Volkswagen case which was all about
lying about the emissions that were
being produced by diesel cars especially
in the United States. And so Volkswagen
for 10 years produced these cars that
had what was called a defeat device
which is a specific device that makes it
look like the cars don't emit very much
nitrogen oxides, but they actually were
way over the legal limit for pollution.
Now, why we should care about nitrous
oxides is because there is no limit of
no like bottom limit of nitrous oxides
that is healthy for the the human lung.
So, basically any amount is bad for you
and it's related to things like asthma,
it's related to things like premature
death, it's related to all kinds of
negative immediate health effects. And
this is what was being pumped out of
these cars at wildly high rates, 40
times the legal rates in some cases and
they decide about it. They just covered
it up. They knew they didn't well, some
some of the people there's a big debate
within the Volkswagen people who've been
convicted. A lot of people say, "I
didn't really know. I'm being
scapegoated." Fine. People knew. The
question how much and who, that's up for
debate. But certainly people knew
because they had to create the thing.
Like they had to literally create this
piece of software to put into the cars.
And then when they got caught, they lied
about it. And eventually, the truth came
out, but it was like 10 years later.
And so the question is what leads
people, clever people? These aren't
idiots. These are like clever engineers
who are literally working on emissions.
Like they know exactly what these
emissions do to people. They know
exactly how harmful they are. What leads
people like that to lie about it, to
create these things and to keep and to
continue lying when they are caught?
And so that is
one of the cases I I cover in it and I'm
looking at it more as a case study for
this kind of crime which is the sort of
corporate collective crime and the lying
and just what leads people in these
settings to lie and to cover up each
other's crimes and to conform to these
new norms, these harmful environmental
norms. And so I look at it
in that way. And then in other chapters,
I look at like people go undercover and
uncover poaching gangs. And there it's
some somewhat procedural where it's more
I didn't know that there were undercover
agents infiltrating poaching gangs. I
didn't know that Interpol was involved
in all of these kinds of environmental
crime and how. And it gets quite
exciting in some of these cases where
you really see the people who are trying
to hold people accountable.
What are the different ways to fight
environmental crime that you describe?
So, what I found most interesting in
researching for Green Crime. So, I was
speaking to people from the United
Nations who are doing these huge
research reports on things like the
international trafficking in wildlife
crime. I was talking to people who were
infiltrating
at the EIA, the Environmental
Investigation Agency. It's like the sort
of undercover police of the earth and
they're infiltrating these organized
crime groups, these gangs that are
involved in poaching and other
activities. I was talking to this
Interpol agent and it's I think all of
these people were talking about very
different ways of measuring
environmental crime
and of responding to it. And so
depending on who you talk to, the answer
will be very different. How do we fight
crime?
And the answer is also very different
potentially than in other kinds of crime
that are more commonly discussed like
violent crime. So, initially when I
started trying to apply criminal
psychology to these really big crimes of
that are often also multi-level where
you've got bosses, you've got the
whether it's a corporate boss or a an
illegal gang boss you've got the middle
men, you've got the people on the ground
who actually have the guns who are
killing people or animals or are logging
or polluting and then you've got sort of
all these levels of people and that
makes it very different from the kinds
of crimes that we often talk about in
other kinds of true crime for example
where it's sort of one person, maybe a
couple of people against one other
person or a couple of other people. And
so the scale is so tiny normally. And
it's mostly violent crime which is
mostly
it's arguments, it's bad decisions, it's
people who are frankly often quite
vulnerable themselves like substance
using, people with mental health
problems, people who are sleeping rough.
Like these are not healthy normal people
most of the time who are perpetrating
bad crimes. And yet in this context, in
environmental crime, this is why I
couldn't apply the research directly.
You've got some of the smartest people
in the world who are still engaging in
fraud, who are engaging in the cover up
of financial information, who are
creating shell companies in order to
hide certain things for poaching, the
proceeds of poaching. You've got people
who are out there illegally fishing and
someone's insuring the vessel that has
been literally registered by Interpol as
a criminal vessel for 10 years and
someone's going, "I'll insure that."
And so you've got these really
complicated other factors going on. But
I thought that's what was so interesting
is ultimately stripping back
each layer of each of these crimes and
going, "Who is that person?
Who is the person who's
insuring this? Who is the person who is
out there engaging in illegal fishing on
the boat? Who is the person who's
financing the boat? Who is the person
who's investigating it, right?" And so
looking at all the different levels and
I think that's where you get some
clarity and actually at the end of the
book for me
I felt so optimistic.
I went into Green Crime because I like
most people in the world, at least
according to a recent UN climate survey
something like 85 to 90% of people in
the world think about the climate crisis
on a regular basis.
Most people think about it every single
day.
This idea that there's this like
minority of people who care about
climate change, that's an illusion.
That's not true. And if you ask people
what the emotional consequences are of
those feelings, it's people say things
like eco-anxiety, anger, sadness, grief
that we're you know, we're worried about
the future. But what you want is for
people to feel motivated, energized,
purposeful about tackling one of the
biggest issues of our time.
And certainly by meeting all of these UN
researchers, but I went to so many
conferences.
You you have no idea how many
conferences I went to. I went to
anti-corruption conferences. I went to
wildlife crime conferences. I went to
the specific meeting of multilateral
agreements to see how like people were
negotiating in the room and the tensions
between it it was wild. It's so
interesting. It's such huge space and it
gave me so much hope for the future. And
actually the way you frame it
very clearly as a crime against earth.
Somehow that's more
actionable.
And it's less controversial and divisive
because climate change as a topic has
become like a political issue
where it's like
is it really happening? Is it
like
what's the right policies?
It's nice to look at actual obvious
criminals. Yeah, where no one's debating
did someone just burn down this
rainforest? It's like
we can see it. I was at a European Space
Agency conference recently and they were
telling us all about the different
satellites that are imaging sort of
pointing at the earth rather than out
into space and that are imaging through
all these different wavelengths exactly
what's changing. And they're basically
just chronicling how the earth has
changed over time and a lot of these
environmental crimes can be seen from
space and can be measured. And so it's
like as long as you trust those data the
question then is, "Okay, so these crimes
are happening. How do we stop them?" And
as you say like I was very much trying
I mean you can't write a book on
environmental issues and be apolitical.
I think that's impossible. But I
certainly was trying to look at it quite
logically and go, "Here's a crime. We
all agree this is bad and they have
these are people who've been convicted.
This isn't just like someone who didn't
do their recycling."
Because also I think that individual
level is often detrimental.
But these are
huge huge crimes that cost us a huge
amount of money to clean up and that
cost a huge amount of human health and
you know, have these other knock-on
effects
and are changing certainly the structure
of our planet in a way that we can feel
already. And so
that is the purpose of the book is to
try and show that we actually have lots
of laws already. We've got lots of
enforcers. We've got lots of researchers
on it from space and not space looking
at these issues, tracking them and
trying to hunt down the criminals. So,
what can you say about
how people end up doing bad stuff in a
company when there's a lot of them?
Are they bad people? Like
how do you get to that place
where you in a large collective are
doing something really bad. So, the
psychology of environmental crime, I
find often boils down to the same kinds
of things that we have already been
talking about in the context of quote
unquote evil, where it's things like
conformity. So, doing what you think
everyone else is doing or know what
everyone else is doing. So, there's an
industry where you know that lots of
people are cheating or are fudging the
facts in some way, then you both feel
the need and also maybe rationalize the
ability to also deceive. Because it's
market forces, right? Like ultimately,
in a free market or even a controlled
one, you've got these people who are
just lying to everybody else and they're
saying we're getting to these
X outcome by following the rules that
everyone else is and they're not.
They're just lying to consumers, they're
lying to the the regulators, they're
lying they're just lying. And then other
people who are trying to be honest and
you know, play the game clean, they see
the success of this other company and
go, well, we we want to have what they
have. And then they realize they can't
with the tech that exists get there. And
so, what do they then realize is, well,
they must be cheating. And so, then they
start cheating. And so, it has this
trickle effect of making everyone else
fall in line with these
well, unethical practices that are
unethical on so many levels. And then
later, you get these huge lawsuits
because if it you know, if you get get
caught, then everyone's upset. The
investors are upset, the consumers are
upset, the environmentalists, the
lawyers, everybody's upset with you
because you have committed this huge
crime.
Yeah, I mean, you you explained so many
forces there, but even the simple force
of social pressure, like very slight
social pressure. I was just watching
this um
um
documentary. It's based on a book,
Ordinary Men, talking about the the
Germans uh the in Nazi Germany that were
taking part in the execution squads
in Eastern Europe.
And uh that they were given the option
not to do it.
And ultimately, they most people decided
to keep being part of the execution
squad even though they had no hatred in
their heart seemingly whatsoever. It's
just slight social pressure. You don't
want to be the guy that kind of chickens
out.
And just a little bit of social pressure
and you are able to very quickly
dehumanize
a large number of people and to murder
them
without any hate in your heart, without
anything that could trivially directly
be identified as quote unquote evil.
Just normal people doing very bad
things.
And you can be an emissions engineer
with a kid with asthma and an old
grandma who's struggling and with her
health and still feel like, yeah, I know
that I'm creating these dirty cars and
yet I'm going to do it anyway. Because
as you say, there's a the conformity,
the social pressure, the
rationalization, and those are all very
human experiences and that's why
also in the book, I always focus on
whistleblower is a big word, but like
people who at some point actually helped
to uncover what was going on. And that
if we're back to the topic of heroes,
we're back to bystander effects, we're
back to all of the social psychology and
criminal psychology that we've been
talking about this whole time, which is
why I thought it was so important to
apply that research to this context. And
to say,
okay, so now we've got
these people who are willing to engage
in these crimes, they know it, but
there's also this moment of how do you
get out of it? And who is going to stop
them? And back to the idea of heroes.
And you do usually in these cases at
some point have a hero, either an
external one or an internal one, who
goes, this needs to stop.
Do you have empathy for those criminals?
I have empathy for everybody.
Has that ever been in your life
challenged?
Like where you had trouble empathizing?
Ooh.
There is one context. So, there is one
context that I
I don't know if it's that I have trouble
empathize I think it is I have trouble
empathizing and I just think it is
I don't want to.
And I don't know why this is the one
thing, but I remember writing evil and
I got to the section on sexual slavery.
And there was something about that very
specific issue of having women in
particular in a confined area where you
have often trafficked them and then
you're forcing them to engage in
repeated sexual acts
that
the person who is running that.
It's tough for you.
>> I can't. That's like the
I know that I'm not saying that that's
the worst kind of crime. I don't think
that necessarily is. I just think for my
mind, there was just a
you can't go there. That's I don't know
how to empathize with that person.
Yeah, I have I probably have a bunch of
categories of people and stuff with kids
is just like it's tough.
It's tough. Yeah.
>> It's tough.
What gives you hope about this beautiful
world of ours, about the future of human
civilization,
given
all the darkness that you've studied?
I think the fact that there are people
who study the darkness gives me hope.
And that there are people who want to
understand why we do bad things, myself
included, but I mostly get to benefit
from other people's research that I
summarize into my books.
And I think that
I think that the tech that we are
now experiencing
mostly also gives me hope in that there
is this whole new frontier of
capacity to implement scientific
findings if we want to do so and choose
to do so.
Like also even in memory interviewing,
we were talking about the potential role
of AI in distorting our memories. I when
I do talks, when I do corporate talks, I
tell people the prompt that I used to
use the cognitive interview, which is
the best practices in memory
interviewing. Cuz you can also tell, you
know, AI tools to do the appropriate
kind of interviewing if you're talking
about memory things. Um and I created a
company called Spot uh of in 2017, which
uses uh
well, it's not we're not building it out
to be AI, but it's basically a tool to
record important emotional memories and
to share them as information with
others. So, that I've always been
interested in how tech can help us to
record
important emotional events. Like with
Spot, talk to Spot. And
how technology can actually make us feel
more human. So, there's these capacities
like memory that we're bad at and tech
can help us to overcome some of those
shortcomings as long as we use it in a
science-backed way rather than just sort
of freestyling. I think the worry I have
sometimes is that, as I've said before,
we're sort of ignoring the social
scientists entirely sometimes when
building these systems and it ends up
becoming this engineering math problem
when that's not actually, in terms of
the consequences for humanity, what it's
going to be. And so, I'm always keen on
connecting social sciences and big
issues.
Can you speak more to Spot? This sounds
fascinating. So, what what's
what's entailed in recording important
memories?
So, Spot came out of my going around the
world and giving everyone an existential
crisis.
So, I'd go around and like with you, I'd
say, look, our memory is really faulty
and here's all the ways it can lie to
us. And people would go, oh no. And then
I'd go, bye.
That's funny. Some point, I was like,
maybe I should do something about this.
And so,
and so I did. And so, I um I went to a
well, I did a TED Talk and I was invited
to this tech conference called Founders
Forum, which is this sort of meeting of
tech founders and others in London, but
then also a couple other places. And I
was invited to this and while there, I
met the uh founder of Evernote, Mhm. um
Phil Libin. Cool. And so, I met Phil
Libin at this event and I was talking to
him about my research on memory and how
I've been wanting to implement or
translate what I've been doing into
something that could prevent false
memories. And specifically, I was
interested in creating a an AI or at
least machine-administered version of
the cognitive interview. So, that's the
neutral
approach. It's already a scripted
approach, which was helpful. So, it's
been scripted for decades or a couple of
decades. Um it's been scripted for
decades as the cognitive interview and
when we train police on how to do it in
places like the UK, it's literally just
asking people to basically read a script
that we have fine-tuned over the years.
And what can do that really well? Well,
chatbots can do that really well. And
so, together with Phil Libin and my two
co-founders, Dylan and Daniel, I ended
up co-founding Spot, which is
talktospot.com if you want to check it
out. And it ended up sort of pivoting
into this general reporting tool for
workplaces, where this was before Me
Too, but it was
the idea being that in lots of workplace
environments, you have important
emotional events that are really
important to understand, but are really
hard to preserve and often you have this
really bad evidence that you're relying
on. So, someone at some point sort of
goes to HR and says something and
somebody else says something else and
you're sort of unsure as a company maybe
who to who to trust, what's real. And
so, we were trying to streamline that.
And so now, Spot is a reporting tool for
any kind of compliance issues. And so,
you can talk to Spot, it's called, and
it is this chatbot interface that
administers the cognitive interview and
then creates a report that then gets
sent, if you want, to your employer. So,
we work with like insurance companies,
medical companies, we work with the bar,
so all the lawyers in the UK use it
themselves, which I always think is a
real stamp of approval when the bar
council's using your tool. Nice. Um but
again, not not bars and drinks, bars and
lawyers. Yes. But,
>> I'm picturing all these like
people like with flare,
throwing vodka bottles in the air. Not
not them. Oh, they're great, too, but
yeah. They could also use it
potentially.
Um but, we've got people reporting like,
you know, someone left bleach in a
machine. So, it's like a more small
memory. So, it's streamlining reporting
processes. I mean, can you envision
something like Spot being used for
recording generally important emotional
events, positive and negative,
throughout your life? That seems like
something
the LLMs of today would really benefit
from. Yeah.
Again, that's why. Just so you're not
just strictly looking at like compliance
or in the context of companies. So, in
the context of Spot, yes, it's just
compliance and it's it's that. But, I
think in sort of private life and in
terms of where I think this could go, I
I'm I'm interested in all memories. And
I think that important life events can
be recorded. And I think the idea of
having like grief bots and having things
that have a representation of you or the
your loved ones,
I think that's something that I like
seeing in the future. I would Have you
gotten a chance to work with maybe the
Gemini team or OpenAI folks or any of
them, Anthropic? Cuz it seems like they
don't have enough
people that think about this. Well, I'm
I'm just waiting for an email. Okay.
Well,
Maybe I'll get one after this. I'm I'm
hanging
>> up, guys. Yeah, I'm hanging out with the
mind folks. That'd be really That'd be
really fascinating to to see. First of
all, the the proper cognitive interview,
that's really interesting.
That's really interesting. How to not
lead, how to not to plant false
memories.
I don't think any of them are thinking
about that. I don't think so, either.
And then how to make sure that you're
using that to um help people to store
our contemporaneous evidence outside of
the I just think that there's so much
potential that's being wasted right now.
Yeah. So, the hope is that technology
and that there's people being willing to
empathize with all different flavors of
the
human condition.
That's your source of hope for the
future. And to celebrate all the people
who doing amazing research and really
cracking down on things like
environmental crime. And like spending
their lives to fight specific kinds of
crime. Yeah, I like this Earth.
I hope I hope we fight for it.
It's the only one we got and I'm
pretty hesitant to say that maybe in
this galaxy we might be the only ones,
so.
Let's Let's protect it. Well,
uh what's your name again? Just kidding.
Julia, this is a huge honor. Um
I've been a fan of yours for a long
time. I'm really glad we got a chance to
talk. This was really fascinating. Your
work is fascinating and you're just a
fascinating human being. So, thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks for listening to this
conversation with Julia Shaw. To support
this podcast, please check out our
sponsors in the description, where you
can also find links to contact me, ask
questions, give feedback, and so on.
And now, let me leave you with some
words from T.S. Eliot.
Most of the evil in the world is done by
people with good intentions.
Thank you for listening.
I hope to see you next time.